---
title: The Prophets
description: Interpretations on the major and some of the minor prophets, namely Hosea, Joel and Amos.
---

This page is under construction and what you see can be called the first step or the beginning of a work or process to get the best responsive websites for mobile phones and devices, which until now (2024) has not been created yet with Lutheran writings and books.

## Interpretation of the Prophets

**Dr. Martin Luther\'s**

**Complete Writings,**

published by

**Dr. Joh. Georg Walch.**

**Sixth volume.**

**Interpretation of the Old Testament.**

(Continued.)

**New revised stereotype edition.**

St. Louis, Mo.

CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.

1897\.

Dr. Martin Luther\'s

**Interpretation of the Old Testament.**

(Continued.)

Interpretations on the major and some of the minor prophets, namely
Hosea, Joel and Amos.

**(The interpretation of the remaining minor prophets is found in the
fourteenth volume).**

**Published anew on behalf of the Ministry of the German Evangelical
Lutheran Synod**

**of Missouri, Ohio and other States.**

St. Louis, Mo.

CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.

1897\.

**\
Foreword.**

Walch has brought together in the sixth volume of his edition all of
Luther\'s interpretations of the prophets that were known at his time.
Since then, the material belonging to it has increased so much through
the new discoveries in Zwickau and Altenburg that it was not possible to
bring all this into one volume, but a division had to be made. This has
now been done in such a way that we have included the interpretations on
Isaiah to Amos in this volume, but have saved the rest for the
fourteenth volume that will appear first. The space necessary for this
has been gained by omitting from the fourteenth volume the Latin Bible
translation attributed to Luther, which does not belong in our entirely
German edition.

The editing of these interpretations was very laborious. Of all the
writings about the prophets, only those published by Luther himself,
about Jonah, Habakkuk and Zechariah, were written in German; all the
rest had to be thoroughly revised from Latin and completely
retranslated, more than 3000 colums. This

This work was connected with great difficulties, because the text of the
Latin originals is often very corrupted. This applies not only to the
writings already present in the old editions (e.g. in the more extensive
explanation of the 53rd chapter of Isaiah, in the small section § 207,
there are three severe textual corruptions, which were recognized
neither by the editors of the Latin nor by the old translator), but also
to the writings in the critical editions of the latest time; to a
greater extent by the Erlangen edition, to a lesser extent by the Weimar
edition. We want to prove the correctness of this statement for these
editions with one scripture each.

From the Erlangen we select the interpretation of Hosea edited by
Dietrich, exegetica opera, tom. XXIV, p. 165 sqq. Mr. want to say
nothing of the hundredfold wrong, many times senseless punctuation,
which in the Weimar edition, vol. XIII, p. XXXVI is dismissed with these
words: \"The Erlanger edition is in this not at all to be taken as a
pattern.\" The most common compendia, as those for que, quam, quod, tur,
are not properly resolved,

VI Foreword.

and we encounter p. 291 and p. 297 the word quoquam instead of quoque;
p. 295 postque instead of postquam; p. 282. 299. 348. 397. 440 quod
instead of quam; p. 242 and p. 485 quam instead of qui; p. 377 quo
instead of quod; p. 322 qua instead of quae; p. 235 premunt instead of
premuntur. Proper names are written in lower case: p. 222 and p. 396
aquas instead of Aquas (After); p. 265 instead of lyra ftatt Lyra; p.
523 aquila instead of Aquila; p. 349 salus instead of Salus (the goddess
of salvation); p. 374 cupidinem instead of Cupidinem (Cupido); p. 377
priapum instead of Priapum; and vice versa we find p. 209 Paulo instead
of paulo. A curiosity is p. 487 the word levinati instead of Levi nati
(born of the tribe Levi). We encounter words that do not exist: P. 223
connovatur instead of concionatur; P. 279 impenditium instead of
impendentium; P. 375 indignitationem instead of indignationem; P. 499
stulus (not a misprint, for even the Wittenberg reads this way) instead
of stultus; P. 330 destincti instead of distincti. P. 167 habet instead
of habent; p. 273 ostendit instead of ostendat; p. 274 discant instead
of discunt; p. 277 invenire instead of inveniri; p. 278 timere instead
of timeri; p. 180 cultis instead of cultus; p. 191 respublica instead of
respublicae; p. 209 sic instead of hic; p. 217 convenimus instead of
conveniunt; p. 249 beneficia instead of beneficio; p. 250 vinae instead
of vineae; p. 279 significationis instead of significationes; p. 289 at
instead of et; p. 295 βτη&έον instead of ; p. 303 xxxxxxx; dum instead
of tum; p. 306 vidi instead of vide; p. 310 ferre instead of fere; p.
318 defenderunt instead of defenderent; p. 326 impositio instead of
imposito; p. 329 filios instead of filius; p. 338 praedicat instead of
praecidat; p. 349 tamen misericor

diam instead of tam misericordem; p. 352 ingratia instead of in gratia;
p. 377 vocabula instead of vocabulo; p. 400 in instead of ita; p. 410
feri instead of seri; p. 436 in Jacobum instead of in Jacob, cum etc.;
p. 445 docet instead of docent; p. 477 queri instead of quaeri; p. 504
rectum instead of tectum; p. 505 ecclesia instead of ecclesiae. The
Hebrew is also given incorrectly several times, e.g. p. 395, 456 and
485. This register could be enlarged, but it may be enough.

Now we turn to the Weimar edition and take from it the interpretation of
the prophet Hosea according to the Zwickau manuscript, which is found
there vol. XIII, p. 2 ff. The text of this is golden compared to that of
the Erlangen, and there are only a few reading errors or incorrect
readings, so that we gladly put down the Erlangen edition, according to
which we had edited the first pages, as soon as we had recognized the
better quality of the Weimar edition. However, even in the editing of
this edition, we had to struggle with great difficulties several times,
of which one can convince oneself if one reads the notes we added to
this publication. For although the manuscripts have been diligently
consulted in the Weimar edition, we still miss a due consideration of
the Holy Scriptures (resp. the Vulgate). As a result, more than twenty
errors have arisen in this One Scripture: the annotations are drawn to
the wrong biblical passages; here and there, the necessary keywords are
missing; elsewhere, words are highlighted as keywords that are not; yes,
there are even wrong keywords.

Foreword. VII

which of course affects the sense not a little. Now we let evidence for
this follow. S. 5, line 10 (Cap. 1, 7.) we find \"Νοn salvabo\" as a
keyword, while it should be (from the same verse) Et salvabo. The
opening words of the interpretation immediately following, \"With
wonder-loving words all the prophets point to the kingdom of Christ,\"
indicated that \"Νοn salvabo\" could not be the correct keyword, and had
one then searched the Bible, Et salvabo would have been found. - S. 9,
Z. 17 (Cap. 2, 14.) Loqui at cor with its interpretation, which is
marked with the verse number \"15.\" belongs To the 14th verse and
should have been placed before line 14. On the other hand, the verse
number \"15th\" should have been placed before Vinitores in line 14. In
the same line, the Erlanger will read hic instead of hoc. - S. 19, line
1 should have been preceded by \"Sic melius\" the first part of Cap. 4,
12. (according to the Vulgate) should have been placed as a keyword. But
there is no keyword, and the interpretation of v. 12. is appended to v.
11. without a new verse number and other distinction. - P. 20, line 5
(Cap. 4, 13.) Ideo fornicabuntur is marked with the verse number
\"14th,\" although it still belongs to v. 13; only in the following line
should \"14th\" have been placed before: Non visitabo. - P. 21, line 3
lacks the keyword and the verse number before the interpretation
(Israhel 2c.), which does not belong to Cap. 4, 15. where the Weimar
edition has drawn it, but to v. 16. - S. 29, Z. 3 Scientiam etc. is
drawn to Cap. 6, 7. while it belongs to v. 6. - P. 32, Z. 10 should be
the whole line: \[Cap. 7,\] 5. the regis etc. ge

should be deleted, because the whole interpretation of lines 11 to 19
belongs to B. 4, not to v. 5. The verse number \"5.\" should be placed
before line 20. - P. 34, line 16 should have begun a new paragraph with
the word Recedere, and the verse number \[Cap. 7,\] \"13.\" should have
been placed before it. Now, however, it makes the impression as if the
whole following interpretation still belonged to v. 12. - P. 35, line 18
(Cap. 7, 14.) a new paragraph is made with the words Sed ego laetor in
corde etc., and these words are highlighted as a keyword. Here it would
be inconsistent to refer the words: \"They worship the belly as their
god and leave me\", to the preceding words: \"But I rejoice with all my
heart\", as to their keyword, and the Weimar edition should already have
recognized from this that the latter are not the correct keyword. A look
into the Bible would also have taught that the words sed ego laetor in
corde etc. are not found here in the biblical text to be interpreted,
and thus cannot be key words here at all. Rather, they are taken from
Ps. 4, 7. freely according to the Vulgate and belong to the preceding. -
S. 37, Z. 14 should be placed before Invocant the keyword in question
with the verse number (Cap. 8,) \"2.\", - S. 37, Z. 15 the verse number
\"3.\" is to be deleted, because the note given there still belongs to
v. 2. In the same line is to be read instead of Allegorat :- S. 38, Z. 1
is the

The number of verses should be \"3. - On p. 38, line 11, the verse
number (Cap. 8,) \"5.\" should be placed before Projectus, but deleted
in line 14. - S. 38, Z. 21 should have been written with \"Ipse\", which
is a new keyword and should be [blocked]{.underline} (in our

VIII Foreword.

Bible: \"the calf\"; Vulg.: ipse), a new paragraph should begin,
provided with the verse number (Cap. 8,) \"6th\". On the other hand,
this number is to be erased p. 39, line 7. - On p. 40, line 12, the
words: Sed et\" are to be deleted, but in the following line after the
verse number (Cap. 8,) \"10.\", because they belong to the keyword. -
The words p. 40, line 18: conturbat terras are to be changed after Ps.
29, 9. into conturbat cervas (he arouses the hinds). The Erlanger reads:
cerras. - In the interpretation of Cap. 8, 12. we encounter p. 41, line
5 the sentence that seems senseless to us: si do tanquam scriptum omnium
eum, nihil tamen efficio etc.. Instead of oomnium eum, nomen meum is
probably to be read, which also seems to be indicated by what the Basel
edition offers: aliud semper nomen indunt. - S. 43, line 20, the verse
number (Cap. 9,) \"8.\" is to be deleted. The same is p. 44 either Z. 10
before speculatorem or Z. 12 before Laqueum. - On p. 49, line 20, the
words: Super faciem aquae are highlighted as a keyword, but they are
not, but belong to the preceding. On the other hand, immediately after
the words just mentioned, the verse number (Cap. 10,) \"8.\" should have
been placed with the keyword: Disperdentur. In the following line, the
verse number is then to be deleted. - P. 51, line 26 is missing at the
beginning of the line the verse number (Cap. 10,) \"13.\" and the stitch
word: Vra8ti8 impietatem ete. - P. 56, line 21 the verse number (Cap.
12,) \"2. \"0 should be erased. The new verse number \"2.\" with the key
word: rludiomm er\^o Domini etc;., which is missing in the Weimar one,
would have been already Z. 18

1\) According to the Vulgate, the verse numbers in Cap. 12 are one less
than in our Bible.

should stand before the word: 4uäa8. - P. 58, line 27 the keyword Idolum
and the new verse number (Cap. 12,) \"8.\" are missing. The
interpretation is drawn to the seventh verse in Weimar. - S. 62, Z. 13
is missing before 8ervavi te the keyword In äeserto and the verse number
(Cap. 13,) \"5.\". - P. 62, Z. 14 is missing before the words: \"they
have the fullness\" the keyword 4uxtu PU80NU and the verse number
\"6.\".- P. 64, Z. 12 should be before Dro 1p86 the verse number (Cap.
13,) \"15.\", not first Z. 13. - P. 65, Z. 18 should be preceded by
Derde- tnr the verse number (Cap. 14,) \"6.\", not first by Z. 22. - In
many other places than those mentioned here we have had to overcome
difficulties and make improvements, as can be seen in our editing. All
words enclosed in square brackets there are inserted by us.

Even in Walch\'s old edition, we did not find everything smooth, but had
to make many Höckerichte even during the revision. We now want to give
an account of this as well. The following examples are all taken from
one scripture, namely the short interpretation of the prophet Isaiah,
Vol. VI, 1 ff. There we read Col. 95, §7 2) \"righteousness\" instead of
unrighteousness (1uju8titiam); 164, 22 \"medici\" instead of healing
(mediemu); 184, 55 \"in all places\" instead of in all kinds (ommmo(Ü8);
185, 57 and likewise 400, 2 \"power\" instead of night (noete); 221, 120
\"propitiation\" instead of propitiation (xraeümtiouem); . 227, 129
\"they\" instead of themselves; 258, 169 \"keep in check\" instead of
fence (86pire); 266, 184 \"a son.\"

2\) In what follows, the first number indicates the columne, the second
the paragraph.

Foreword. IX

instead of in the son (in filio); 269, 189 the word: concern is missing;
293, 228 we read: \"although such properties are not real persons
(propria personae), as the Grammatici take the nomina propria\" instead
of: \"although they \[names derived from offices and activities\] are
not proper names of the person, as the grammarians call proper names
(etiamsi non sunt propria personae, sicut grammatici vocant propria);
297, 232 \"all\" instead of therefore (sic); 330, 1 \"hunger for the
word\" instead of theure time, as far as the word is concerned (famem
verbi); 454, 16 \"afterward\" instead of never (nunquam); 493, 11 \"the
words\" instead of the word \[of God\] (in u8u verdi); 532, 13
\"heresies\" instead of heretics (daeretiei); 539, 26 \"every animal\"
instead of everything that lives (omne aninml M 145, 2\]); 559, 65 \"has
measured\" instead of been measured to (inen8uratu8 68t); 592, 7
\"Hanes\" instead of Tanis (\^dan68); 761, 19 \"idols\" instead of
blocks (8tipit68); 766, 28 \"shameful\" instead of harmful (p6rnieio8a);
813, 15 \"others\" instead of all (onin68); 819, 30 \"giant\" instead of
man of war (dollator); 821, 34 \"a Manichaean\" instead of Manichaeus
(Manieda6N8); 835, 11 \"strange\" instead of ineffable (in6narradil6in);
856, 29 \"That he call the LORD\" instead of What the LORD says ((jnod
Oonünn8 dioit); 954, 2 \"You who do not despise the word, do not
despair, but seek that everything may be rightly done and governed
everywhere\" instead of You who do not despise the word, but would that
everything may be rightly done and governed everywhere, do not despair!
(I\^olit6 d68p6H6, V08, non 60nt6inniti8 V6I dunst 86(1 V6Ü6118,
1\'66\^6 ONNN ndiM6 \^6l1 6t ad

inini8trari); 974, 8 \"teaching evil\" instead of when not rightly
taught (nmw do66r6); 1062, 39 \"instead of the Jews who will be vexed,
not one people but many Gentiles shall be sprinkled in the likeness of
the cross of Christ\" instead of: instead of the Jews who will be vexed
at the likeness of the cross of Christ, not One people but many Gentiles
shall be sprinkled (looo dud\^orura, Hui o\^nd\^tur t\'orniw 6ruoi8
Odrwti, uou UUU8 xopu1u8, 86(1 rauita6 A6Ut68 Ä8P6i\'g6utui\'); 1068, 49
\"the same\" instead of him(6uui \^(1dri8tuili\] ); 1105, 120 \"I, saith
Satan, will make thee blessed\" instead of I, saith he \[Christ Jes. 49,
25.\], will help thee (D\^o, incMt, t6 8alvado); 1118, 143 \"And not
alone has he been taken out of that judgment\" instead of And not alone
is he condemned by that judgment (Mo judioio 86. 60ud6iuuatu8); 1182, 23
\"ugly\" instead of hateful (odio8i); 1187, 31 \"heretical\" instead of
seditious (86ditio8a). That in 1277, 24 i-obor6 and xatr6in 6orum is
given instead of the correct reading of the Vulgate: rudor6 and xart6ra
8uain, Walch is not solely to blame for this, but also the Latin
editions, which have the same wrong reading, but he is certainly
responsible in 1277, 23 for 6ord\'688iou6 instead of 6oiUu8iou6. 1129,
160 Luther\'s translation has been taken for that of the Vulgate. 1134,
167 the translator says that in the Latin translation the plural, in
mortibu8, stands, while this is the case only in the Hebrew. 803, 44 the
translator continues after \"the superstition\": \"This is the queen and
empress over all that is high in the world.\" Sometimes the given
translations are not correct.

X Foreword.

radezu wrong, but still not satisfactory, e.g. 1107, 126 \"to heal the
whole earth\" instead of making the whole world blessed; 1110, 130
cathedra \[the chair or seat from Ps. 1, 1., \"where the scoffers
sit\"\] is rendered by: \"the cathedra.\" Politia is almost without
exception given by \"policey,\" which here and there makes a rather
comical impression, as, 738, 17: \"so he \[Hezekiah\] complains here
about having to leave the policey.\" As an indication, this may be
enough; a detailed statement of all errors and irregularities would
probably fill a booklet.

The Weimar edition says in its preface to the thirteenth volume: \"We
have made good progress with the Erlangen edition,\" and this statement
is fully justified. We, too, may be allowed to say that we have been
able to improve on what has been offered so far, some shortcomings and
errors. We prove this only with the Weimar edition, as the relatively
best. We do not take into account real or probable printing errors.

In the interpretation of the prophet Joel according to the Altenburg
manuscript, Vol. XIII, p. 92, line 14, the words Confusi sunt agricolae
should have been highlighted as a keyword and designated with the verse
number (Cap. 1,) \"11.\", but they are attached to the preceding verse
without any distinction. - S. 93, Z. 20 we read (Cap. 1, 18.): Ex
hebraeo: etiam greges *omnium* desolatae sunt. If the Hebrew Bible had
been consulted, XXXX would have been found, and thus the correct reading
ovium instead of omnium. -

P. 97, line 35 we read (Cap. 2, 6.): \"es Wirt in Haussen gehen\". To
this the note: \"Ob häuften \-\-- Haffen, Hafen, Gefäß?\" We answer: No,
because these German words are translations of congregabuntur, around
which the interpretation turns, as the context teaches; it is not olla
that matters. We would not have mentioned this if a false explanation
had not been built later on this false conjecture, namely (Cap. 2, 20.)
p. 106, line 7: \"das eyn stuck hie faul Wirt\" 2c., where \"faul\" is
explained in a note (no longer with a question mark) with reference to
p. 97, line 35 by \"fall\". But here, too, the context teaches that
\"faul\" is to be understood, for it speaks of \"verfaulen\" (de foetore
et putredine p. 105, Z. 27). - On p. 100 we read in the note to line 23:
\"Wit. \[should read: Jen., for in the Wittenberg our Scripture says
nothing cites psalm 144 and 85 s\[see\] but ps. 103.\" The Jenaer is
right in its citation \"Psal. 144\" \[Ps. 145, 8th\]. For there patieus
is found, which is what our text offers, whereas Ps. 103, 8. \[according
to the Vulgate\'s count ps. 102\] lonKuuiiniK. The citation of \"ksul.
85\" \[Ps. 86, 15.\] is justified by the fact that only there the
reading nüserieoi-äiae is found, while in the other two Psalms it says:
uuiltum iniserieocs. - P. 120, Z. 25 (Cap. 3, 19.) is to be read in the
margin (with the Erlanger) \"Dan. 7, 12.\" instead of: Dan. 12, 9. This
is proven by the words given in the text from the Vulgate. - P. 122, Z.
7 (Cap. 3, 23.) reads procul instead of: *non* procul. A look at the map
would have taught that Sittim is not far from the Dead Sea.

Foreword. XI

Furthermore, the Zwickau manuscript has at the corresponding place, p.
87, line 11 *non* longe a mari mortuo. - S. 122, Z. 25 (Cap. 3, 24.) the
Weimar manuscript as well as the Erlangen manuscript offers: *pro caede*
instead of: procede (thus no printing error). If the Vulgate had been
looked up, the correct reading would have resulted from Ps. 45, 5. -
Finally, we find p. 122, line 32 and likewise in all editions:
satisfactionem, which could also have been improved by insight into the
Vulgate (1 Cor. I, 30.) into sanctificationem. - The same applies to the
last keyword (p. 122, line 28) in this writing: Et Juda in aeternum
habitabitur, which belongs to the 25th verse. On the other hand, the
interpretation refers to v. 26 (in the Vulgate v. 21), so here, just as
in the Zwickau manuscript, it should have been put: 21. Et mundabo, etc.

In the interpretation of the prophet Joel according to the Zwickau
manuscript, Weimar edition, vol. XIII, p. 68 ff, we find the following
errors: p. 69, line 2, the verse number \"4.\" should be placed, but
line 5 should be deleted. - On p. 70, line 20, the verse number \"15.\"
should have been placed before a, a, a; line 22, it should be deleted. -
P. 70, Z. 25 (Cap. 1, 16.) should have been replaced by: ,,Vo8tri Q08tri
68t,\" should be read: ,, V68ti\'i8 \^00IlIi8\] UO8tri8 68t.\" After
that, from the Vulgate, should be inserted: \^?6i-i6i-unt in ckonio Drü
U08tri Ia6titiu 6t 6x6u1tatio). Without this addition, the phrase: *quia
cultus dei corruit*, is meaningless. For all we are offered about v. 16.
is: V68tr-i uo8tri 68t, Hula 6u1tu8 ckvi oorruit. - In the second
chapter, p. 72, z. 14, the verse number \"4.\" should be before Hula
piop6 68t

deleted, but line 16 should be placed before Diss t6N6dramini. - P. 74,
line 5 should be preceded by 4 \"ort68 the verse number \"7.\" but
omitted in the following line. - The sentence p. 74, lines 8 f., Ü6U8 to
vu1n6r6ntur, must be inserted, as the Altenburg manuscript has done,
(not in the seventh, but) in the eighth verse, namely line 13 after the
words: In eall 6 8trato. - P. 77, Z. 25 (Cap. 2, 19.). In the . Satze:
O8t6nckit uou Iru8tra ineain 6886 6ouv6iM0N6iu i8tam will have to be
read Ii-U8trau6am instead of krustra uwaiu, because the pronoun ru6am is
not well possible in this place. The word Iru8tran6U8, which the
dictionaries do not offer, is found in the Weim. Ausg. in this volume,
p. 151, line 7. - p. 77, line 20, the verse number \"19.\" is to be
placed before Hierori\^uru8 and line 24 is to be deleted. The Altenburg
and Hall manuscripts have this remark only at v. 20. - p. 78, Z. 1 (Cap.
2, 20): ut 8ockoina6 p6ri6runt, should be read udi instead of ub. - P.
78, Z. 8. should be read L266KM6 instead of 86ck6olüa6. - P. 78, Z. 17
(Cap. 2, 22.) instead of \"heil\" is to be read das ist - P. 78, Z. 21
(Cap. 2, 23.) instead of Do-n is to be read das ist Ebendaselbst should
be read in the infernal handwriting: Hodraso MAicküoal 6to. instead of:
,, Ü6l)ra60 Mor6 , for is not the ablative of iuo8. - p. 81, line 24
(Cap. 2, 30. Vulg. \[not \"31.\" which line 22 is accidentally set\]) is
to be read vaxor6m I\'unii instead of \"vorpoten luml.\" - The verse
number \"31.\" should be placed p. 82 line 5 before lunam, but line 7
should be erased. - Also in the third chapter several times the verse
numbers (according to the Vulgate) are not in the right place.

XII Foreword.

P. 84, line 22 the verse number \"7.\" should be placed before Ecce ego,
but line 27 should be deleted. - P. 84, line 29 should be \"8.\" before
In, but line 31 should be deleted. - P. 85, line 6 should be \"9.\"
before Clamate, but deleted in line 11. - P. 85, line 12, the words:
Accedant et ascendant omnes viri bellatores should have been emphasized
as a keyword.- P. 86, line 18 ff. the paragraph: Malitia eorum 2c.
belongs to v. 13, should therefore have already been in line 9. In Z. 20
we do not consider the word Juxta est to be a keyword. - In this third
chapter, we also encounter only one significant offense, p. 86, line 32
(Cap. 3, 16. Vulg.): ergo cessabunt vomeres gladiis. This does not fit
into the context; therefore, according to the Altenburg manuscript, we
have changed it to: ergo cessabunt *omnes* gladii, which is in
accordance with the train of thought. - Other unevennesses are minor,
partly probably typographical errors, namely p. 83, line 16 ergo instead
of ego; p. 84, line 14 the word amicos is omitted after inimicis; p. 86,
line 5 \"wol\" instead of \"vol\" (that is, full); p. 86, line 10
\"hyn\" instead of \"hie\".

We do not want to leave unmentioned here that the Weimar edition has
done a difficult and thankful job by processing the material of the
second chapter into a whole. In the form in which it appears to us in
the Erlangen edition, exeg. opp. XXV, p. 12-31, it will hardly find
readers who would like to work their way through the chaos.

Since Veit Dietrich\'s editing of the Weimar edition was helpful in
interpreting the Prophet Amos according to the Altenburg manuscript,
there are no

incorrect keywords, and only in two places, namely p. 193, line 6 (Cap.
7, 3.) and p. 194, line 5, errors in the verse numbers. In the former
place, the verse number \"6.\" is erroneous; in the latter place, the
number \"9.\" is missing, which is found erroneously only in line 9.
However, the verse numbers are missing in very many (more than fifty)
places. Moreover, apart from a few typographical errors, as p. 162, line
10 res instead of rex; p. 169, line 3 licerrime instead of liberrime; p.
173, line 14 lur\" instead of Lore rc., the text is an excellent one,
and we have been able to improve only a few places, namely p. 167, line
7 (Cap. 2, 4.) should read /tatt des zweiten idola: mendaoiu, as the
Zwickau and Hallische manuscripts attest. - P. 170, Z. 18 (Cap. 2, 9.)
should be read instead of \<l68up6r: 8udt \"r. - P. 171, line 19 (Cap.
3, 1.) is to be read instead of yuia: yui. - P. 173, Z. 2 (Cap. 3, 6.)
is to be read instead of sti8titia: inM8titm. - P. 181, line 12 (Cap. 5,
5.) instead of oileud it should read: oilZ-nI \^do8. 5, 7.\]. - P. 182,
line 11 (Cap. 5, 8.) instead of ä686enä \"r6 it should read:
anender\". - S. 187, line 9 (Cap. 5, 25.) is to be read instead of \"in
p8u1ino 11\": in p8alino 77 (Ps. 78, 18.). - Furthermore, in the notes
which bring the Hall manuscript, two errors have struck us, namely p.
188, line 4 v. u. should read vi8itutioni8 instead of vastationis, and
p. 199, line 1 should read festivitates instead of captivitates.

Our judgment of the interpretation of Amos according to the Zwickau
manuscript is not quite as favorable. For here we again encounter
multiple deficiencies and errors in the verse numbers and key words,
which we have not yet discussed.

Foreword. XIII

We do not want to enumerate them further, so as not to tire the reader
too much; in our edition, they are indicated in the notes. In addition,
we have only noted the following errors: p. 124, line 21 (Cap. 1, 1.)
videt instead of vidit. - P. 125, line 6 (Cap. 1, 1.) erigere instead of
eligere (1 Cor. 1, 27.). - 127, line 29 (Cap. 1, 6.) suas instead of
tuas (Gen. 14, 20.). - P. 128, Z. 22 (Cap. 1, 11.) Sterters viä6i\'6
tlie mitti, 8. 8161\'011/1116 instead of: 8tert6r6 viäetur-tti6 mitti 8.
8i6r0\^n/mu8ft which the Altenburg manuscript offers. - P. 131, Z. 33
(Cap. 2, 13.) \"geit\" instead of A6init. - P. 136, Z. 19 (Cap. 4, 5.)
benekao instead of deneplaoita t\'ao (Ps. 119, 108.). - P. 138, Z. 4
(Cap. 4, 13.) ni6U6 instead of 8uae, which the Altenburg manuscript
offers. - P. 139, Z. 23 (Cap. 5, 5.) \"Oeäeon 7, 3j\" instead of 3\^08ua
\^08. 4, 19. 5, 10.\]. - P. 140, Z. 9 (Cap. 5, 7.) v6rt6i-6 instead of
V6ibum. - P. 146, line 6 (Cap. 6, 8.) is found in the manuscript: pro
t68, which both the Erlangen and Weimar editions have added thus:
\"xrot68\^tatni\^\". But it should read: pro\^6ivita\^t68. The whole
sentence reads: 8er 8/1166606I1611pro 6ivita\^6s. - P. 148, line 24
(Cap. 7, 7.), where the Erlangen edition shows a gap, the Weimar edition
has the addition ,,\^Mu8

S. 150, Z. 6 (Cap. 7, 10.) is written in the margin Is. 10, 11. instead
of Is. 10, 22. - S. 151, Z. 6 (Cap. 8, 1. f.) should be put instead of
the second Kait: kes. - S. 156, Z. 3 (Cap. 9, 9.) is mutare instead of
nutare. - In the notes (that is, in the Hall manuscript), we noticed the
following three errors: p. 132, line 7 v. u. malo instead of mala; p.
132, line 1 v. u.

a non transgrediendo instead of a transgrediendo and p. 133, line 1
jugum instead of jubam.

With the prophet Amos we conclude this volume. From the findings of
modern times, the interpretations of the prophets Hosea, Joel and Amos
according to the Zwickau manuscripts and those of the last two prophets
according to the Altenburg manuscript are newly included in the same
instead of the adaptation of Veit Dietrich, which was not approved by
Luther, because the latter had repeatedly been guilty of arbitrariness
and violence with Luther\'s interpretation. We have indicated Veit
Dietrich\'s deviations in the notes, as was also done in the Erlangen
and Weimar editions. About the sources we have given detailed
information in the first note to the prophet Hosea and the prophet Joel,
therefore it is sufficient that we refer the reader to what was said
there.

Now it only remains that we discuss the relative value of the different
relations. It cannot be denied that the Zwickau manuscript has the
advantage of the greatest originality for the prophets Joel, Amos and
Obadiah, since the college transcriptions are offered to us in it. But
on the one hand, the deficiency of the copy, the hearing errors, the
many gaps, the disjointedness of the sentences, the incomprehensibility
of the abbreviations, the illegibility of the manuscript, on the other
hand, the imperfection of the decipherment of the same, the many reading
errors and incorrect additions, the lack of or incorrect punctuation,
take this manuscript

XIV Foreword.

almost completely lost their value. Luther would not have admitted the
publication of writings of such nature. Therefore, we cannot avoid
attributing superiority to Dietrich\'s adaptations. The Altenburg
manuscript is also an elaboration of Dietrich. He has, what has been
recognized by his contemporaries quite generally, the copies at his
disposal with great skill processed into a whole. That in which he has
proceeded arbitrarily, or what he has added, nowhere concerns the faith,
but mostly only unessential things. On the other hand, such an editor
has not yet been found for the raw material in the Zwickau manuscript,
and will also be difficult to find later. In the form in which it is now
available to us, we are not seldom expected to read the

The most barsten nonsense as Luther\'s speeches to accept. The Erlangen
edition has done an almost unbelievable job here, which (exeg. opp. tom.
XXV, p. 9) has read three different remarks by Luther on Joel 1, 7. 8.
into each other, which are next to each other in the manuscript. The
Weimar edition has not done so badly, but it still leaves much to be
desired, as can be seen from the previously mentioned expositions. We
also do not expect to have achieved something completely satisfactory,
but we have endeavored to make these writings more comprehensible
through numerous additions, mostly made after the parallel manuscripts,
which have been placed in square brackets.

May God also give His blessing to the course of this volume.

**St. Louis, around Reformation Day 1897.**

**A. F. Hoppe.**

**\
**Content

of the

The sixth part of Luther\'s complete writings.

**Dr. Martin Luther\'s Interpretation of the Old Testament.**

(Continued.)

**X. Interpretations about the prophets.**

Column

A. Short interpretation (*scholia*) on the prophet Isaiah. Interpreted
1527-1530; printed 1532 and 1534 1

More extensive explanation of the 9th chapter of Isaiah.

> Issued toward Christmas 1543; printed . 1546 92
>
> More extensive explanation of the 53rd chapter of Isaiah.
>
> Laid out in the Passion and Easter seasons 1544; printed 1550 640

B. Sermon on Jer. 23, 5-8. Preached 1526; printed 1527 852

C. Translation of the 38th and 39th chapters of the prophet Ezekiel.
Germanized end of April 1530, published beginning of June 1530 880

D. Interpretation of the Prophet Daniel.

> The Prophet Daniel German. Written in February 1530; issued about
> March 1530 892
>
> 1\. letter of the translation to Duke John Frederick of Saxony.
> February or March 1530 892
>
> 2\. preface on the prophet Daniel together with the interpretation of
> the eleventh and twelfth chapters 896
>
> 3\. disputation on Dan. 4, 24. Delivered 1535 942 E. Interpretation of
> the prophet Hosea.
>
> 1\. notes on the prophet Hosea, copied about between March and July
> 1524; printed 1884. (Zwickau manuscript.) 946
>
> 2\. notes on the prophet Hosea according to a manuscript printed at
> Basel in 1526 1030

Column

> 3\. interpretation of the prophet Hosea recited and overlooked by
> Luther, compiled and edited by Veit Dietrich.

1545 1070

> The most distinguished doctrines and the main sayings in the sermons
> of Hosea 1394
>
> M. Luther\'s addition to the passage Hos.

13, 14: \"Death, I will be a poison unto thee\" 2c. 1400

F. Interpretation of the prophet Joel.

> 1\. lectures on the prophet Joel, according to the Altenburg
> manuscript. Delivered July and August 1524; printed in Veit
> Dietrich\'s first edition 1536, according to the Altenburg manuscript
> 1884 1414

2 Luther\'s interpretation of the prophet Joel in

> Veit Dietrich\'s second edition. 1547\... 1478 The most important
> teachings from the sermon
>
> ten Joels 1646
>
> 3\. Lectures on the Prophet Joel, according to the Zwickau manuscript.
> Delivered July and August 1524; printed 1884 1650

G. Interpretation of the Prophet Amos.

> 1\. lectures on the prophet Amos, according to the Altenburg
> manuscript. Delivered in December 1524 and January 1525; printed in
> Veit Dietrich\'s edition 1536, after the Altenburg manuscript 1884
> 1684
>
> 2\. the same according to the Zwickau manuscript. Printed 1884 1774

(The interpretation of the remaining minor prophets follows in the
fourteenth volume).

**X. D. Martin Luther\'s Interpretations on the Prophets.**

**A. Brief interpretation (*scholia*) on the prophet Isaiah. \*)**

**Laid out 1527\--1530. Printed 1532 and 1534.**

Translated from Latin.

Short report by the publisher of the Wittenberg Latin edition of 1534.

The printer wishes the reader good luck. When I let these notes go out
in print two years ago, it happened, due to my excessive haste at the
time, that they came to light somewhat shorter than they should have
been. For since a certain student had collected them from the lectures
of D. Martin Luther for the purpose of having a certain, but brief,
interpretation of the meaning and understanding of this prophet, I
thought that I would do no small favor to those devoted to the Holy
Scriptures if I published the work that he had undertaken out of private
diligence and presented it publicly to everyone. For since this prophet,
next to Moses and

David, has the first place among all, I thought it would be useful for
the church, if one, with so much of the old and new interpretations,
also about this prophet a short and clear explanation publicly issued.
Although I now believe that my undertaking will easily be applauded by
all well-meaning people, I still found fault with the fact that the
explanation was in many places shorter than it should have been. For I
did not allow the one who first compiled this interpretation as much
time as was necessary for this matter. Therefore, in order that I may be
all the more faithful to my duty to the church and to the lovers of
godliness

\*) In the years 1527 to 1530 Luther gave lectures on the prophet
Isaiah. In May 1527, he wrote to Wenceslaus Link (De Wette, Vol. Ill, p.
172) that he was preparing to publish the prophets in German, and at the
same time to read about Isaiah, so that he would not be idle. From
Mathesius, who moved to the University of Wittenberg at Pentecost (May
16, 1529) (Köstlin, M. Luther, Vol. II, p. 156), we learn that Luther
was at the 45th chapter of Isaiah at that time, and concluded the whole
interpretation about the end of February 1530, because he says
(Mathesius, Luthers Leben, St. Louiser Ausg, p. 105), \"From Doctor
Luther I have about forty weeks to hear the twenty-two last chapters in
the Prophet Isaiah interpreted.\" Our writing does not come from
Luther\'s own pen, but a student made short notes for his own use during
the lectures, which the printer Hans Lufft first published in 1532 in a
shorter form, then in 1534 in more complete form, about which he reports
in the latter edition in a letter to the reader. This report is here, as
in the Latin Jenaer, in the Leipzig edition and Walch, prefixed to the
scripture. The first edition of 1532 appeared under your title: In In
Esaiam prophetam Scholia ex D. Mart. Lutheri praelectionibus collecta.
Wittebergae. Excudebat Johannes Lufft 1532. The more complete edition
was published by the same in 1534.

2Interpretations about the prophets. W.vl.sf. Z

I would like to testify more, I have had these notes increased in many
places that required a more extensive explanation.

Now it would be desirable that the very rich interpretation, which D.
Luther has presented in the explanation of this prophet, would be
completely reproduced by a true master, however, because this could not
be done without the greatest work, so I have thought that one should, as
it were, collect these fragments from such a delicious table, with which
the students could refresh their souls and satisfy their hunger to
understand this prophet in something. For here they will find in short,
as it were in a bundle, the understanding of the whole prophet. And
diligent readers will easily notice what main doctrines (locos communes)
D. Luther has presented in the explanation, where he has dealt more
extensively with faith, good works, the cross, authority, human
statutes, the use of the sacraments, the law, the gospel, etc.. For the
one who has copied these notes, has

The following is a summary of the teachings of Luther, which have been
given to understand almost everywhere where such extensive disputes have
taken place. However, if anyone should still require a further
elaboration of these doctrines, he can find it in other books, which
Luther has published in great quantity and for the great benefit of the
church. However, it will be seen that even in this, although brief,
explanation, the most important doctrines have been dealt with
sufficiently here and there.

I had intended to include the entire text; however, since there was no
skillful translation available, and those passages where the Latin
interpreter was very much lacking have been improved here, I did not
want to make this book too large, especially since the Bible is in
everyone\'s hands, which the students can take to help them read these
notes; and they want to put up with my work and dedication, and use it
to good advantage. Farewell to the reader! Given at Wittenberg, August
1, 1534.

under the title: In Dsaiarü propsistai\" 8o5o5a, ex Doot. Zlart. 5ut5ori
praelootiouitzus oollsota, multis in loeis non parvu Mvessione auota.
VitederMe N. D. XXXIIII. at the end: üxeuäedut losiunnos ImkU.
\^VitteniberMe. 1534. Another edition was published in 1546 at Tübingen
under the same title, but with the addition: \... aueta. Oarrasn
NattUiae Ourditii Ill\^rioi in obiturn I\^utüsri, \^rueourn et latinurn.
\'kubinF. 1546.All these editions are in octav. In the Reformation
period, only individual pieces were translated into German, namely the
interpretation of the 36th and 37th chapters, which appeared under the
following title: \"Auslegung V. Martin Luthers über das sechs und sieben
drevssigste Kapititel des Propheten Esaias, über die Massen nützlich,
dienstlich und tröstlich in allen leiblichen und geistlichen
Anfechtungen durch Georg Spalatinum verdeutscht. Wittenberg 1535.\"
quarto. This piece is found in the German Wittenberg (1556), vol. V p.
2735; in the Eisleben, vol. II, p. 3365; in the Altenburg, vol. VI, p.
342; in the Leipzig, vol. VII, p. 252 and in Walch, vol. VI, 670.
Further, \"The 5, 111 chapter of the Prophet Isaiah, Of the Passion and
Glory of Christ. Interpreted by v. Mari. Luther. Wittemberg 1539.\" At
the end: \"Printed at Wittemberg by Nickel Schirlentz.\" Quarto. This
piece is found in the German Wittenberger (1556), vol. V, 2865; in the
Altenburger, vol. VI, p. 357; in the Leipziger, vol. VII, p. 352 and in
Walch, vol. VI, 984. It was only for the Leipzig edition that N. Greifs
translated the entire writing into German. It is found in dm
collections: Latin in the Wittenberg (1552), tom. IV, lol. 1255; in the
Jena (1603), toru. Ill, toi. 283 and in the Erlangen, 6X6Z. opp., torn.
XXII and XXIII per totum. German in the Leipziger, vol. VII, p. 40 and
in Walch, vol. VI, 1. The indication of the Erlanger: Oernmn. 5Vittsn5.
IV, 125 is an oversight. We have used the text of the second edition of
1534, as do all the complete editions, but without using the brackets,
which are found both in Walch and in the Erlangen edition. Walch has
enclosed in brackets what is added in the 1534 edition, the Erlangen
edition has enclosed in brackets what is found in the first edition of
1532. We have done neither, because in the case of a text not published
by Luther himself, no one can be interested in determining exactly how
much or how little an editor has added or omitted in an acknowledged
hasty, defective edition. Rather, we consider the use of brackets to be
an unnecessary burden on the sentence and a burden on the reader,
because he is thereby drawn away from the matter and continually
reminded of the defectiveness of the first redaction. It is sufficient
that both relations are communicated completely. We have recorded the
deviations of the first printing from the second (with the exception of
a few insignificant variants) in notes. In the thorough improvement of
the old translation, we have used the Erlangen edition, comparing the
Wittenberg and Jena editions. The thirty-sixth and thirty-seventh
chapters, which the old editions retained in Spalatin\'s translation, we
had to retranslate because of the defective nature of the latter (it is
extensive and arbitrary). We have omitted Spalatin\'s letter to the
Electress Shbilla of Saxony, dated \"Thursday after the holy Christian
day 1535\" (the 30th of December 1534), because it contains nothing of
importance. Likewise, we have had to re-translate the 53rd chapter,
which is reproduced in Walch\'s old edition according to the translation
of 1539, because the old translation is excessively verbose.

[4L . xxii, 3-5, Short interpretation on Isaiah. W.vr, 4-7.
5]{.underline}

**D. Martin Luther\'s Preface from the Prophets of Isaiah.\*)**

\(1\) If anyone wishes to read the holy prophet Isaiah usefully and
understand it more fully, let him (if he has no better knowledge) not
despise this counsel and advice of mine: first, that he not skip the
title or beginning of this book, but learn to understand it in the best
possible way; lest he think that he understands Isaiah almost well, and
suffer it to be said that he has never understood the title and first
line, but is silent about the whole prophet. For the same title is
almost to be taken for a gloss and light over the whole book. And Isaiah
himself, as it were, points his readers to it as a guide and reason for
his book. But whoever despises the title or does not understand it, I
say to him that he should leave the prophet Isaiah in peace or will
never understand it thoroughly; for it is impossible to hear or remember
the prophet\'s word and opinion correctly and clearly without such a
thorough knowledge of the title.

\(2\) But the title I mean and mean not, that thou read or understand
these words, Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Jehizkiah king of Judah, 2c. but take
before thee the last book of the kings, and the last book of the
chronicles, and take the same well, especially the histories, speeches,
and accidents that happened among the kings that are named in the title,
unto the end of the same books. For it is necessary, if one wants to
understand the prophecy, that one knows how it was in the country,
\[and\] the things were situated in it, what the people were like, or
had for plots with or against their neighbors, friends and enemies. And
especially how they have behaved in their country against God and
against the prophet, in his word and worship, or idolatry.

**Lands situated around Jerusalem and Judah.**

It would also be good to know how the countries are situated in relation
to one another, so that the foreign, unknown words and names do not make
reading unpleasant and cause darkness or hindrance in understanding. And
so that I may be of service to my simple-minded Germans, I will recently
indicate the countryside around Jerusalem or Judah where Isaiah lived
and preached, so that they may see all the more clearly where the
prophet turns when he prophesies at noon or midnight.

\(4\) Toward the east Jerusalem or Judah has the Dead Sea nearest to it,
where Sodom and Gomorrah stood in ancient times. Beyond the Dead Sea is
the land of Moab and the children of Ammon. Beyond that lies Babylon or
Chaldea, and still further the land of the Persians, of which Isaiah
speaks much.

005 Toward the north is Mount Lebanon, and over against it pass Damascus
and Syria: but farther on, toward the east, is Assyria, of which also
Isaias speaketh much.

006 And toward the west the Philistines, the worst enemies of the Jews,
lie by the great sea: and down by the same sea, toward the north, lie
Sidon and Tyre, which border with Galilee.

007 There are many countries toward the south: Egypt, the land of the
Moors, Arabia, the Red Sea, Edom, and Midian; so that Egypt is toward
the south in the evening. These are almost the countries and names that
Isaiah prophesies of, as of the neighbors, enemies and friends, that lie
about the land of Judah, as wolves about a sheepfold. With some of whom
they made covenant and covenant at times, and yet they helped them
nothing.

\*This preface does not actually belong to this writing, but Luther
wrote it for the German translation of the prophet Isaiah published in
1528. But because it gives an instruction to understand the prophet
correctly, all editions have prefixed it to our writing, and we have
retained it as well as Walch hrer. In the Latin editions, the title
reads: Praefatio Doctoris Martini Lutheri in JEsaiae lectionem, which
gives the impression that this preface belongs to the lecture on the
prophet, which is not the case. In addition, several changes have been
made in the Latin preface to the German original, which are aimed at
making it appear to belong to our Scriptures. Walch does not include the
German preface among the prefaces in the fourteenth volume, but only
here, but nevertheless considered the altered Latin preface as
authoritative, and corrected it accordingly. We reproduce the original
German text.

6 **L. XXII, s-8.** Interpretations on the Prophets. **W. VI, S-7-10.**
7

**What the prophet Isaiah is talking about.**

8 After this, you must divide the prophet Isaiah into three parts. In
the first, like the other prophets, he deals with two things: One, that
he preaches much to his people, and punishes their various sins, but
especially the manifold idolatry, which had prevailed among the people
(as also now and always pious preachers do and must do among their
people), and keeps them in correction with threatenings of punishment
and promises of good. The other is that he sends them and prepares them
to wait for the future kingdom of Christ, of which he prophesies so
clearly and manifoldly as no other prophet does, that he also describes
the mother of Christ, the Virgin Mary, how she was to conceive and bear
him with untainted virginity, Cap. 7, 14, and his suffering in the 53rd
chapter together with his resurrection from the dead, and his kingdom
proclaimed in a mighty and dry way, as if it had happened at that time,
that \[it\] must have been an excellent, highly enlightened prophet. For
so do all prophets, that they teach and rebuke the present people, and
proclaim Christ\'s future and kingdom, and direct and point the people
unto it, as unto the common Saviour, both of the former and the latter;
yet one more than another, one more abundantly than another; but Isaias
above them all most abundantly.

9th In the other he has a special thing to do with the empire of
Assyria, and with the emperor Sanherib. There he prophesied more and
further than any other prophet, namely, how the same emperor would win
all the surrounding countries, including the kingdom of Israel, and how
much misfortune would befall the kingdom of Judah. But there he stands
as a rock with his promise, how Jerusalem should be defended and
delivered from him; which miracle is probably the greatest one that is
found in Scripture, not only because of history, that such a mighty
emperor should be defeated before Jerusalem, but also because of faith,
that it was believed. It is a wonder, I say, that a man in Jerusalem
could believe him in such an impossible thing. He will no doubt often

have had to listen to many evil words from the unbelievers. He still did
it: he defeated the emperor and defended the city. Therefore, he must
have been well off with God and a great man before him.

In the third part he has to do with the empire of Babel. There he
prophesies of the Babylonian prison, so that the people should be
punished and Jerusalem disturbed by the emperor of Babylon. But here is
his greatest work, how he comforts and sustains his future people in
such future destruction and prison, so that they do not despair, as if
it were over with them, and Christ\'s kingdom would not come, and all
prophecy would be false and lost. How richly and fully he preaches that
Babylon should be destroyed again, and that the Jews should be loosed,
and that they should come again to Jerusalem; that he also indicates,
with arrogant defiance against Babylon, the names of the kings who
should destroy Babylon, namely, the Medes and Elamites or Persians; but
especially the king who should loosen the Jews and help them back to
Jerusalem, namely, Cyrus, whom he calls the anointed of God, so long
before there was a kingdom in Persia. For it is all for the sake of
Christ, that the future of the same, and the promised kingdom of grace
and blessedness, should not be despised, or lost through unbelief and
great unhappiness and impatience among his people, and be in vain, if
they would not wait for it, and certainly believe in the future. These
are the three pieces that Isaiah deals with.

**What order the prophet Isaiah hold.**

\(11\) But he does not keep the order, that he fasts each in its own
place, and with its own chapters and leaves, but is almost mixed
together, that he introduces much of the first piece under the other and
third, and probably the third piece acts about before the other. But
whether this was done by the one who read and wrote his prophecy
together (as is also considered to have been done in the Psalter), or
whether he himself put it that way, according to which time, causes and
persons occurred, to speak of each piece, which time and which persons
were involved.

88\. xxn, s-u. Short interpretation on Isaiah. W. vi, w-12. 9

Causes may not be equal nor have order, that I do not know. So much
order does he keep, that he shows and drives the first, as the noblest
piece, from the beginning to the end, both through the other and the
third piece. Just as in our sermons it is our duty to do that our most
important part, to punish the people and to preach about Christ, is
always included, even if we sometimes accidentally intend to preach
something else than about the Turk or the emperor 2c. From this,
everyone can easily grasp the prophet, and make sure that the order (as
it seems to be with the unaccustomed) does not mislead him or make him
weary.

12 We have made every effort to ensure that Isaiah speaks well and
clearly in German, even though he has made it difficult for himself to
do so, and has almost increased the number of those who know German and
Hebrew well, as you will see, but most of all the conceited masters who
think they know it all. For he has been almost eloquent in Hebrew, that
the awkward German tongue has soured him. 1)

\(13\) But what benefit he who reads Isaiah may have, I would rather let
the reader find out for himself than tell. And whoever does not
experience it nor wants to experience it, it is also of no use to boast
much about it. It is full of lively, comforting, heartfelt sayings for
all poor consciences and miserable, sorrowful hearts.

1\) This sentence is missing in the Erlangen edition in the 63rd German
volume p. 58; instead of the same, the last sentence of the following
paragraph is also here.

So there is also enough of the deterrents and terrors against the
stubborn, hopeful, hard heads of the wicked, where it should help.

014 But thou shalt not look upon Jeshuaam among the Jewish people as
anything but a despised man, even as a fool and a foolish man. For as we
hold him now, so they have not held him, but, as he himself testifies,
Cap. 57:4, they have put forth their tongues against him, and have
pointed fingers at him, and have thought all his preaching foolishness,
not even a little more pious children in the multitude than the king
Ezechias 2c. For it was the custom of the people to mock the prophets
and consider them foolish, 2 Kings 9:11, as has always happened to all
ministers of God and preachers, happens daily and will happen from now
on. This can also be seen in the fact that he punishes the people the
most for idolatry; he hardly touches the other vices three times, such
as boasting, drinking and 2) being stingy. But the presumption on their
chosen idolatry and own work, or comfort on kings and alliance, he
punishes through and through, which was unpleasant to the people,
because they wanted to be right in it. For this reason he was finally
killed by King Manasseh as a heretic and seducer, and (as the Jews say)
cut apart with a saw.

2\) Erlanger: to binge. The Weimar Bible and the Altenburg Bible also
have the reading \"binge\"; in Latin is: luxus.

**Short remarks (scholia) on Isaiah,**

compiled from the lectures of Doctor Martin Luther.

**Preface to the Lecture on the Prophet Isaiah.**

\(1\) Whoever wants to explain this prophet must understand two things:
First, the grammar, and that he is firm in it and has it perfectly. I
frankly confess that I have not yet reached this point, as have other
great teachers in the church,

than Augustine and others, lacked it. However, the other knowledge,
namely of the sacred histories, is even more necessary. For if one had
to do without one of the two, I would rather have this than the grammar,
as we also see in Augustine. How-

10 L. XXII, 11-13. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 12-15. 11

Although he does not understand grammar, and therefore often lacks the
right understanding, he nevertheless remains, because he diligently
pursues history and has a good grasp of it, with the similarity of
faith. The opposite can be seen in Jerome. His knowledge of the Hebrew
language was great enough; but because he treats history very coldly, he
often departs greatly from the rule of faith. For this reason, knowledge
of history is absolutely necessary; for this, not only is it necessary
that one understand the words and syllables as they are spoken, but that
one also has that which belongs to rhetoric and logic, that one
diligently considers all the circumstances of the events. Thus I call
the knowledge of grammar not only that one knows what each word means,
but especially the figures and the way of speaking, which is peculiar to
the Hebrew language above others, and which differs from our habit. And
in this piece we have to lament that we are still lacking a lot, because
we do not yet have a properly elaborated Hebrew grammar.

\(2\) Furthermore, one must immediately proceed from grammar to the
knowledge of history, and see what Ahaz and the other kings, under whom
the prophet lived, did; as has been shown above in the preface \[§ 2\]
about this prophet.

The most noble and main content of all prophets is that they put their
people off to the future Christ, as we also see in Moses, who, although
he seems to primarily establish and teach the law, nevertheless always
points to Christ, as we can clearly see from the passage Deut. 18:15.
This is also what we do today. What we teach, order and set, all happens
to the end that the pious should wait for the future of their Savior on
the last day. And this is the reason why the apostles so much emphasized
the teaching of waiting for the other future.

Tit. 2, 13. Hebr. 13, 14. and in other places! places more. Whoever
follows this way will not err in reading and preaching. Therefore, the
prophets must be read and acted upon in such a way that they prepare the
people for the coming Christ. For although the majority of the prophets
speak of the kingdom of the flesh, here and there they recently and
quickly refer to the kingdom of Christ, or secretly aim at it.
Especially Isaiah often speaks about this doctrine, although he speaks a
lot about his people at that time and the kingdom of the flesh. This is
what Peter says in 1 Ep. 1, 10: \"For what blessedness the prophets
sought and searched, pointing to us from the grace to come.\"

Some turn everything into allegories, as Jerome ridicules a certain
Apollinaris, although he himself is in the habit of doing the same. But
they can sometimes be used as ornaments and explanations to teach the
inexperienced common people, to whom one and the same thing must always
be inculcated in a different form.

5\. the treatment of history must be the first and foremost, in which we
see how the pious were protected and helped by God, but the wicked were
abandoned and punished. This must be applied to us, so that we learn
that it will be the same for us if we do not improve our lives 2c.
Therefore, history should be an example for us, by which we should be
taught to live rightly in faith and love. After that, the revealed
prophecies of Christ are to strengthen our faith and religion, since we
see that this was promised and foretold by God so many centuries before.

6 And at this point it may be enough for now, so that we may pay the
more attention to the history. However, Oecolampadius has taken quite a
lot of care with the grammar, even though he departs from us here and
there.

12 **L. XXII, 14** f. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. I, 1. 2, **W.
VI, 16-19.** 13

**Short remarks (**scholia**) on Isaiah.**

**The first chapter. \*)**

**V. 1. This is the vision of Isaiah, the son of Amoz, which he saw
2c.**

1\. this is, as I already stated in the preface

\[§§ 1. 2\], the title of the book, which one must make known diligently
because it shows us the time in which Isaiah lived. Since the
explanations of the prophets must be taken primarily from the stories,
this title is therefore, as it were, an interpretation that gives us the
key to this prophet.

\(2\) Furthermore, the reader must be reminded that Isaiah belongs only
to the kingdom of Judah, therefore he mentions only the names of the
kings of Judah in the title. For under Jotham, the king of Judah,
Tiglath Pilesser led away a good part of Israel, namely two hundred
thousand men, while in the battle one hundred and twenty thousand fell.
And afterwards, about the fourth year of King Hezekiah, Shalmanapser
king of Assyria led away what was left of Israel, namely all ten tribes,
for the sake of the covenant that had been made with the king in Egypt;
as we read 1 Kings 17:4. One must wonder at the stubbornness of the Jews
that they did not take this great misfortune of theirs to heart and
still persisted in idolatry. But so the wicked themselves must hasten
God\'s wrath upon themselves and provoke God\'s anger against them, as
we also see today. 1)

First, the prophet complains about the sins of his people, that they
cannot be corrected either by charity or by punishment. Secondly, he
condemns their efforts and plots, by which they have given in to the
evil of the world.

1\) Everything preceding (including the preface to the lecture) is
missing from the first edition of 1532.

the evil beings. Third, he indicates the way in which they could control
such great evils, namely, that they should fear God, believe in Him, and
do good to their neighbor. To this he adds a promise and a threat.
Finally, when he sees that all this is despised and thrown to the wind,
he repeats the threat and announces a greater devastation beforehand;
however, he promises that only the wicked will perish, but the rest will
be preserved.

4\. a vision is as much as a prophecy, and the seers are taken for
prophets everywhere in Scripture, 1 Sam. 9, 9. but it is a word of
humility, as if he wanted to say, Behold, I preach to you what I see.

V. 2. **Hear, ye heavens and earth, take heed, for the LORD speaketh.**

\(5\) In this he imitates Moses, which is very much to the liking of
this prophet, since he is the most severe of all other prophets. This is
the prophetic order,^a^ , which the Scriptures everywhere follow, that
they first terrify the hearts with the knowledge of sins, and show the
disease; then, when the hearts are thus terrified and humbled by the
word of the law, they restore them again by the promise of grace, which
is given in Christ, and offered to us by the word of the gospel. And
this order is kept by the Holy Spirit forever. But Satan does it the
other way around: first he comforts and caresses, so that the hearts may
not notice that God is so offended by sin. After that, when he comforts
the weak

a\) Here the edition of 1532 continues: \"that the prophet frightens in
the beginning and teaches the law, but comforts afterwards. The Satan
and the false prophets do the contradiction\". Hereupon the following is
missing until the next Bible quotation: \"I have children\" 2c.

\*) This superscription precedes § 3 in the Latin editions of 1534,
because the first edition of 1532 only begins there.

14 L. xxn, is-18. interpretations on the prophets. W.vi, 19-22. 15

If he has lured and deceived souls to their harm by this trick, then he
leaves behind him an abominable horror. For he terrifies and afflicts
the conscience until he brings it to despair, and in these terrors
(which are truly a foretaste of eternal death) he makes the souls hate
God, despair of His grace, and consider their sin to be greater than the
merit of Christ, which is the highest blasphemy. Therefore, we should
remember this order, which we see the prophet keeping here, so that we
may beware of Satan\'s temptations, and oppose the terror of the
conscience to Christ, and the safety to the law 2c.

6 But he calls heaven and earth to hear, that is, to be witnesses; not
that they should understand. For \"heaven\" is not to be explained by
angels, and \"earth\" by men. But if anyone could fully see the
movements of the prophet\'s heart, he would perceive that in every word
there is a fiery furnace and the fiercest heat. Therefore, because of
the great vehemence of the movements, it is not everyone\'s business to
interpret the prophets, unless he has the Holy Spirit for a teacher. Now
the prophet uses this figure to draw the attention of his listeners. As
if he wanted to say: Nobody hears, all are godless, and despise the word
of God; therefore heaven and earth shall hear. Why this? Because \"the
Lord speaks\", whose word deserves to be heard.

When God speaks, it immediately follows what kind of listeners he has,
for, just as Christ says John 8:47: \"He who is of God hears the word of
God,\" others all despise this teacher and hold him in low esteem, they
condemn his word as heresy, as we see today. Therefore, this exclamation
is mainly directed to the sinners who have a beautiful appearance, not
to the coarse ones who sin against the other table, which the world also
understands, but to those who sin against the first table and keep the
other table most holy for the sake of appearance. Such people were the
priests in those days, and today they are the papists and the red
spirits. But what does the Lord say?

**I raised children. ^b^)**

8\. he brings upon the ungodly Jews their ingratitude and blindness. But
these are burning words, which we cannot reach with any speech. He does
not say, I have chosen a people for myself, I have gathered Israel to
myself 2c., but he calls them \"children,\" and says, \"I have brought
them up.\" As if he wanted to say: I have not omitted anything, I have
done everything; I have wanted to be their father, I have adopted them
as my children, I have shown them all fatherly kindnesses, I have cared
for them, I have increased them, I have protected them. If a prince did
these things, they would be great things; but because I, God, do these
things, they are despised. I have not only raised them up, but I have
also \"exalted\" them; I have given them the name of the people of God;
I have given them my word and the promises of my Son; I have given them
and confirmed a kingdom which is the most glorious of all the kingdoms
of the world, in which the service of God and the temporal government
are in flourishing. But what will I be repaid for this?

**But they have despised me.**

9 That is, they have fallen away from me and backed away. Here you have
a picture of the world. If it behaves like this against God, what wonder
that it does the same to us, who are God\'s servants? Therefore, we
should be prepared to expect the highest ingratitude and the utmost
danger for the highest benefit that we render to the world through our
service. God wants to attract the world to His service through His
gifts; but the world misuses them for its godlessness and idolatry.
Thus, today the Gospel through us

b\) From here to the Bible text words v. 5. f.: \"The whole head\" 2c.
only the following is found in the edition of 1532: He accuses the holy
nation of the Jews for forsaking the LORD, and blaspheming the Holy One
in Israel, for departing from the LORD, and remaining stiff-necked in
their ungodliness. Further, you shall note this punishment \[v. 5.\],
\"What shall I strike at you further?\" For thus the wicked are wont to
do; the punishment of their sins they take for a martyr\'s suffering,
and boast in their wickedness, as Ahaz did; the more he was punished,
the more he served idols. Thus, we do not become better through
punishment and laws.

Eat **k. XXII, 18-21.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 1, 2-5.
**W. VI, 22-2P.** 17

The word of God has been spread to free the consciences, but both ours
and the adversaries misuse it for their will to oppose us.

**V. 3: An ox knows his Lord.**

In the previous verse he praised our righteousness and holiness, namely
our extreme ingratitude. Here he also praises the virtue of free will
and our wisdom. But is this not the utmost disgrace that, according to
divine saying, an ox and an ass, I do not want to say compared with us,
but completely preferred to us, because they do their duty against their
master, but we do not do our duty against God? Therefore, we should
uncover our heads before the ox and the donkey as before our teachers,
seeing that they are presented to us by God, so that we may learn from
their examples how to be in awe of our God.

**But Israel does not know it.**

\(11\) For this is the wisdom and piety of men who have departed from
their God, that they are dumber than an ox and an ass, though they make
themselves seem wiser in their own eyes than all men. For what wisdom
can remain if one does not know God? As I said above, no one believes or
hears this except the one who is of God, for he recognizes his folly and
sin and asks for forgiveness. The error is still sorry that one has
misinterpreted this passage to the birth of Christ, because here an ox
and an ass are thought of. But one must remember that it was not safe
for the prophet to punish the whole people so publicly because of their
foolishness and ungodliness.

**Woe to the sinful people!**

Here one must take the contrasts to the help. They want to be a holy
people, but they are \"a sinful people\". They want to be a people
chosen by God, but they are a people of Satan. They want to be the seed
of Abraham, but they are \"a wicked seed,\" and of the wicked, not of
the godly Abraham. They want to be children of the patriarchs

but they are children of perdition and \"harmful children\" who only get
worse with all their thinking and striving. And these are the praises of
this people and all the wicked at all times.

**They have forsaken the Lord.**

\(13\) Here he sums up, as it were, the ungodliness of his people, that
they have departed from the true service of God, that is, first from
faith and love; then from the outward service of the law. For they left
the place appointed by God, the Temple, and sacrificed in the groves and
on the high places, contrary to the divine command. But this is said
against the holy people, who, under the most praiseworthy and holy
kings, were resplendent in a wonderful appearance of holiness. What do
you think the prophet would say about us if he had lived at that time?
But one must raise one\'s mind against these aversions. For it is always
like this: the pure preaching of the Word is followed by heresies.
Therefore the Germans say in the proverb: Where God builds a church for
the right worship, the devil also builds a chapel next to it for his
service.

**They blasphemed the Holy One in Israel.**

14 In this way he will also describe below the worship of the works
saints, that it is a blasphemy. He calls God \"the holy one\", from his
effect, since he sanctifies Israel. Thus Christ is our saint, by whose
righteousness we are sanctified.

V. 5. **What more shall they strike at you?**

15 This is another rebuke. For until now he has reproached the
unbelieving Jews for their ingratitude, that they did not behave
properly after so many benefits of God. Now he also reproaches them for
their hardened heart, that they stubbornly continue in their ungodliness
and cannot be corrected by any punishment. For this is what the wicked
are wont to do: they interpret the punishment of their sins as a
martyr\'s suffering, and boast of the punishment that they suffer for
the sake of God\'s glory. Thus they take the scourge that is sent to
them for their correction as a punishment.

18 L. XXII, 21-23. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2s-28. 19

They are not attracted by promises or threats. There is no way to bring
them back on the right path; they cannot be lured by promises or
frightened by threats, nor can they be improved by beatings. And this is
the reason why Christ says \[Matth. 21, 31.\] that the tax collectors
and harlots would rather enter the kingdom of heaven than the
exceedingly holy Jews. For the gross sinners, who are imprisoned for
adultery, death, theft, 2c., cannot excuse their sins, but must confess
that they have acted wickedly, but the hypocritical saints and spiritual
sinners worship their sins for righteousness, and think they are doing
God a service. Therefore, when they are punished to mend their ways,
they interpret their punishment as a martyr\'s suffering and a test of
their faith.

Therefore, they cannot be corrected, but continue stubbornly, as we also
see in our heretics, who, since they have been warned by an exceedingly
severe judgment of God, not only do not allow their minds to be broken,
but are even more senseless against Christ and his sacraments, and speak
and boast of nothing but the glory of their martyrdom, and are corrected
neither by words nor by blows. So does the godless papacy. Whenever it
has to fear either a foreign enemy, or plague, or famine rages, they
make public supplications. Masses, and other ungodly services, by which
God is provoked to anger, but not reconciled. Examples of this are Ahaz
in the books of Kings, and the unbelieving Jews in Jeremiah, who said
\[Jer. 44, 17\]: \"We will offer drink offerings to the queen of
heaven\" 2c.

V. 5. 6. **The whole head is sick.**

\(17\) Nothing more can be added to your punishments, and yet you do not
allow yourselves to be corrected. ^c^) But I like it, this

c\) Instead of the following in this paragraph, the edition of 1532
offers: \"Wounds and welts\" 2c. This indicates that in such great evils
there are no prophets to raise them up with the Word, but that they are
deceived by false teachers who strengthen them in wickedness and do not
show them sin.

The words are to be taken as an allegory to indicate that he has
severely punished \"the head,\" that is, the princes, \"the heart,\"
that is, the wise men, and the remaining part of the body, except for
the \"soles of the feet,\" that is, the rabble, and yet they are not
corrected by anything. But here one sees how people cannot be improved
by discipline and laws, since they are not even improved by beatings.
These are allegorical words when he says that there is no physician who
can heal the body that is afflicted with various wounds, that is, that
there are no pious teachers who, as Jeremiah says, remind the people of
their sins and punish them, and then comfort the frightened souls with
promises so that they do not despair under the burden of such great
misfortunes.

V. 7. **Your land is desolate.**

18 Now he tells the punishments bit by bit, as it were. Although the
kingdom of Israel had already suffered all this, he nevertheless
announces beforehand that Judah will also have to suffer the same at the
hands of the king of the Chaldeans.

V. 8. \[Vulg.\] **But the daughter of Zion shall be forsaken 2c.**

19 As if to say: You will be deprived of the best and most glorious, but
what will be left will be little and of no value.

V. 9: **If the LORD of hosts would not leave us a little.**

\(20\) It is due to the divine mercy that some remnants are still
preserved, from which one can still hope something, and that we are not,
like Sodom and Gomorrah, completely destroyed. Paul has taken this
passage \[Rom. 9, 29.\] in a somewhat changed form, and makes a general
saying out of it, as if he wanted to say: As Isaias says of his people,
so I also can say: \"If the Lord had not left us seed,\" 2c., that is,
there must remain at least some who will be saved, not because of their
merits, but because of the word of promise. Below, the same saying will
be repeated, where we will explain it more extensively.

20 xxn, 23-25. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. I, 10. 11. W. vi,
28-31. 21

**V. 10. Hear the word of the Lord, you princes of Sodom.**

21\. in these names there is a very severe punishment, that he calls
them \"princes of Sodom\" and \"people of Gomorrah\". And truly, there
was a great spirit in this prophet that he took upon himself to call
this people, which alone on earth kept God\'s name and word, by such
names. Furthermore, he begins here to convert them, and also prescribes
to them the way in which they are to convert. For since God is not
reconciled by our works, and we cannot counsel or help ourselves by our
powers, he prescribes another way for them to be rid of their sins,
namely, that they should first of all abolish pharisaical and
hypocritical righteousness, and begin to fear God and believe in Him;
then that they should serve their neighbor.

**V.11. Why should I care about the multitude of your sacrifices? says
the Lord.**

\(22\) He rejects that which was most noble in the Law, and also
commanded by God Himself, namely the sacrifices. Not as if the
sacrifices were evil in and of themselves, for they were instituted by
God, but because the opinion in which they sacrificed was ungodly. For
they threw away their trust in divine mercy, and believed that they were
justified by the sacrifices, by performing the mere work, which we also
reproach our papists for today. For this is to deprive Christ of his
glory and to ascribe it to our work. For the sacrifices were not
instituted by God in order that they might be justified by them, but
that they might be signs by which the pious testified that they believed
the promises of Christ and were waiting for Christ as their Redeemer.
Therefore, you see that Isaiah is doing to his Jews what we do to our
opponents in all our sermons and writings, namely, that we teach that
God is not at all reconciled by any works or merits that are ours, but
that He forgives in vain and by grace those who hope in His mercy.

Accordingly, the judgment is made here that those are worse than those
of Sodom who imagine that they can propitiate God through their
sacrifices or any other works. If now the sacrifices are condemned,
which are done in the opinion that one becomes righteous thereby, which
were commanded and appointed by God Himself, how will the self-chosen
works of our monks and of the whole papacy fare, as much as they are
good in appearance?

\(24\) Thus, the wicked abuse sacrifices and other good works because
they want to propitiate God through them; and only the abuse, not the
work itself, is condemned outright. This is just as if someone were to
imagine that he would become a child of God because God had given him a
healthy eye. The eye is in and of itself a good creature; but the wicked
misuses it for a cause other than that for which it was created. For it
was created to see, not to earn righteousness. This is what we must
think of all our outward works.

\(25\) Therefore, all works are only for the testimony of faith, not for
the impartation of righteousness, which God has decided to give freely
and by grace to all those who recognize Him as such a God who is
merciful and forgives sin freely and by grace through Christ, so that
the verse may stand, Ps. 51:3: \"God, be merciful to me according to
Your goodness. He does not say, according to my merits, sacrifices, or
other works 2c. Just as a Christian should not despair in sins, so he
should not presume on any work to contribute to his justification. The
50th Psalm and many similar sayings in the Psalms, which the diligent
reader will refer to here, agree with this passage of the prophet.

**I am tired of burnt offerings.**

26 This text clearly says that God does not need our works and does not
respect them; indeed, He condemns even the works He has ordained if they
are done in presumption and in the opinion that they will make us
righteous. Without a doubt, however, they have nothing to do with the.
With the reputation of Moses and the whole law

**22** L. xxii, W-28. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 31-34.
**23**

The prophets accused God of condemning the most holy works of the law,
just as they accuse us today of forbidding good works. For God had
specially appropriated \"the fat\" and \"the blood\" of the sacrificial
animals had many uses in the Law. Therefore, God does both: He requires
of the Jews those works of the Law, and He does not require them. He
demands them absolutely for the testimony of their faith that they
should not disobey His voice and His word, and for the benefit of their
neighbor. But he does not demand them; indeed, he condemns them if they
do so in the belief that they will thereby attain righteousness. But
look at the foolishness of men who completely pervert this order. With
works they want to serve God and become pleasing to Him, who has no need
of them; but with faith they want to make themselves pleasing to men,
while faith must be directed against God, but the works of love must be
directed only against the neighbor.

For this reason, he rejects the flesh, blood and sacrificial animals,
saying that he is full and has no need of them; they should rather
entertain the priests and Levites with them, and not seek to propitiate
God through these things. Therefore these sayings must be diligently
kept in mind against the pretensions and works of men. For what do we
seek to merit the highest majesty with our stained and pretended works,
which has wanted to have mercy on us out of grace precisely because
there was nothing about us that could make us pleasing to God?

V. 12: When you come in to appear before me.

28 This actually refers to the priests who entered the sanctuary, where
God had promised to be present and to hear the prayers of the faithful.
Because God had bound Himself to this place with His word, those who
entered were said to have seen the face of the Lord. It was a great
privilege that God had bound Himself to this physical place, so that
people would know for certain where they should find and grasp God. For
these are the words

(Ex. 20, 24.): \"Where I will establish the memory of my name, there I
will be.\" Therefore, God cannot be found anywhere, nor can He be
\"sought\" in any other place than that to which He has bound Himself by
His word. Under the law, he wanted a physical place to be designated,
which alone in the whole world should be dedicated to the service of
God; and it was idolatry to worship anywhere else, so much so that even
the Jews, when they were abroad and wanted to pray, turned their faces
toward the temple.

29 In the New Testament, however, there is no specific place designated.
For because God presented Christ to us as Savior, all our prayers and
works for Christ\'s sake are pleasing to God, wherever the word of the
gospel is taught and believed. But whatever one prays, teaches and lives
apart from Christ is all idolatry and sin before God.

V. 13. Incense is an abomination to me.

\(30\) There is a special benefit in understanding the universal
statements he makes about the worship of the Jews, which they performed
in the opinion that it made them righteous, namely, that this worship
was disgusting to God, that it was useless, that it was \"an
abomination\", that it was iniquity, that it was a service that God did
not want, that it was \"toil and anguish\" (2c). And this latter
actually refers to the religious works (studia pietatis) with which the
hypocrites burden and toil themselves in vain. For they are nothing but
toil and anxiety, with which the godless hypocrites toil, and yet they
are improved nothing by them. Furthermore, as offensive as it is to our
adversaries today for someone to call the mass such a service by which
God is robbed of His own, a blasphemy, a useless work, 2c., so too was
this preaching of the prophet against sacrifices and other services.

V. 14. My soul is hostile to your new moons.

31 There is a special emphasis in the pronoun \"your\". For it indicates
that the Jews, out of zeal for godliness, had other feast days beyond
those appointed by Moses,

24 **L. XXII, 28-30.** Short Interpretation On Isaiah, Cap. 1, 14-16.
**W. VI, 34-37.** 25

have ordered. Such additions, however, always obscure the first
institution and the true service of God. Therefore, Satan is the author
of it, who is, as it were, an imitator and ape of God.

V. 15. **And while you are spreading out your hands.**

The lifting up of the hands was a gesture of those who prayed, praised
God and gave thanks. Accordingly, he indicates that he does not want to
hear their prayer.

**For your hands are full of blood.**

This is the reason why he condemns all their worship and works (^d^ ).
But it is a description that is the result of a conclusion (a
posteriori). For since he sees that they lived without works of love and
against love, he concludes that they are without faith and are condemned
with all their worship, no matter how good they may seem to be. As if he
wanted to say: You want to reconcile me with sacrifices and other works,
and in the meantime forget about your neighbor, do not care about your
brothers who needed your services. You are death slayers. For, as it is
written in 1 John 3:15, \"He who hates his brother is a murderer.\" But
\"to hate\" does not only mean to be hostile to one, but also to deny
one\'s neighbor those works that love toward one another requires. Just
as the papists do now, so the Jews at that time also wanted to do good
to God and to reconcile God with their works; they had no concern for
their neighbor. But God has an abomination in such pretensions, and only
wants that one fears Him, and believes Him, and shows good to one\'s
neighbor. What the prophet reminds here in turn \[v. 16\], \"Wash
yourselves,\" 2c., requires faith and fear. \[V. 17.\], \"Help the
oppressed,\" requires love 2c. But this prophetic inference is to be
noted, \"Ye have hands full of blood,\" therefore your prayer, your
sacrifices, is such a service that God is abhorred in. But the world
believes the be-

2\) The Jenaer has correctly: rniiuns; the Wittenberger: minius; the
Erlanger: mimius.

d\) Instead of \"their worship and works\" in the 1532 edition: \"their
sacrifices\".

The Holy Spirit does not guide them. Therefore, it does everything else,
but leaves faith and love behind, as such services that have no
beautiful appearance.

**V. 16 Wash yourselves, be clean.**

So far the prophet has dealt with the law, he has punished the
ungodliness of the heart and the unrighteousness of the outward life.
But, as we remembered above \[§ 5\], it is not enough to show the
disease, one must also show the remedies against the disease at the same
time. Therefore he now turns to the other part of the sermon, and shows
the way in which they can be delivered from ungodliness and
unrighteousness, namely, that they should put away unbelief and obey the
promises with simple faith, after which they should do good to their
neighbor.

For in these two things rests the whole Christian life, both the inward
and the outward. The inward has to do with God only through faith, by
which one believes the promise that God certainly forgives by grace and
in vain, for the sake of the seed of Abraham, that is, of Christ. And
this mere faith, which God counts as righteousness without any works
that we have done, whether previous or subsequent, is righteousness
before God. The outward life, however, has to do with people. It stops
at the use of the other table, whose summa is, as Christ declares, to
love one\'s neighbor as oneself. This life gives birth to another
righteousness, not that which is righteousness before God, but before
men. This is the righteousness of the law, because it is of works. The
other is the righteousness of grace, because it comes from an imputation
that is free and of grace. Furthermore, this passage divides thus:
\"Wash yourselves, cleanse yourselves, put away your evil nature (that
is, ungodliness and hypocrisy).\" This belongs to the righteousness of
faith, against the ungodliness of the heart. The remainder: \"Renounce
evil, learn to do good, seek righteousness,\" belongs to the
righteousness of the law, against the unrighteousness of outward works.

26 L. XXII, M-M. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 37-40. 27

**V. 17. Help the oppressed.**

God is not satisfied that one does not do anything against this
prohibition (negativam): Do no harm to anyone 2c., but He also wants the
commandment (affirmativam) to be kept: Be useful to everyone. Therefore,
all monastic life and all life that someone leads for himself is
condemned before God, which does not deal with love.

**V. 18. Let us reason with one another (**Arguite me**).**

\(37\) If you have done this, and I do not do you good again, then
accuse me, saying that I am an unjust God. But this is an excellent
consolation, by which he encourages us to faith and love. But from this
we also see how clumsy the papists are who say that such promises are
the merit of works.

**If your sin is equal to blood red.**

38 This is a very great promise, that he will forgive the sins and
punishments of those who believe in God, fear him, and do good to their
neighbor, and that he will also do all kinds of good in full measure.
For works without faith are condemned, as the Scripture says Rom. 14:23:
\"Whatever does not come from faith is sin.

**V. 19. 20. If you will obey me, you shall enjoy the good of the
land.**

\(39\) To the spiritual promise he adds a bodily one. For to faith he
promises the forgiveness of sins, but to love, or to the righteousness
of the law, he promises the abundance of temporal things. This is how
God does it: first He gives Himself to the godly, then He gives all
goods. By the way, the abundant distribution of temporal goods to the
wicked will make their judgment all the more difficult.

**V. 21: How is it that the pious city has become a whore?**

40\. Now he attaches the opposition: But this is not how you act. But
the vehemence becomes considerably more emphatic by the astonishment of
the prophet, that they are

so great promises could not be moved. For this is the utmost misfortune,
when so great a light of the Word is disregarded and despised, so that
blinded hearts cannot be moved by promises, nor by threats, nor by
punishments.

**V. 22. Your silver has become foam. ^e^)**

41 He explains in detail, as it were, what he calls a whore in general.
And here we see again the order, that he first lists the sins of the
first table, then the sins of the other table. \"Foam\" is the
hypocrisy; \"water\" is the falsified doctrine. For these two things are
always connected with each other: ungodly doctrine follows false
opinions of God; ungodly doctrine follows unrighteousness, so that these
two things are everywhere connected with each other, that the devil is a
father of lies and a murderer \[John 8:44\]. Note, however, that good
authorities, both spiritual and secular, are compared to \"silver\" and
\"wine,\" by which the community is not only strengthened, but also
encouraged and delighted.

**V. 23. Your princes are apostates and thieves. ^f^)**

This is an abominable insult to the civil authorities, that he calls
them \"renegades\" and \"thieves. Does this mean to give honor to the
worldly authority? But the prophet is excused by his office, which
compels him to punish the sins of his own people, whether they are
public or private. Otherwise, if he said this outside his office, he
would be guilty of insulting the majesty. But he does not condemn the
office, but he punishes the vices of persons; and he punishes them as a
public person, not as a private person. He does not condemn gifts or
money, but avarice and the desire for money, that they chase after gifts
and, bribed by gifts, administer their office wrongfully. That is why he
calls them \"journeymen thieves\".

e\) Instead of the following paragraph, the 1532 edition has:
\"Silver.\" It punishes hypocrisy. \"Wine.\" He punishes the

f\) Instead of the following paragraph, the 1532 edition has:
\"Princes.\" He punishes injustice and outward unrighteousness.

28 **L. XXII, R-35.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 1, 24-31.
**W. VI, 40-43.** 29

**V. 24. Therefore the Lord says.**

43 He repeats the threat. But that he adds: \"The mighty one in
Israel\", likewise \"the LORD of hosts\", thus he indicates that he can
do that which he threatens. It is a prophecy of the future evil.

**I will take comfort through my enemies.**

44 Then I will comfort myself when I send those who are otherwise my
enemies upon them to devastate and scatter my people. That is, I will
send for the Assyrians to avenge my contempt.

**V. 25. foam.**

45\. I will only destroy the wicked and hypocrites, so that the
hypocrites will no longer rule.

**V. 26. and give you judges again.**

46 Note this passage: God tears down so that he builds; he afflicts so
that he saves. Satan and the world do the opposite. Therefore he will
also say below Cap. 11, 4: \"he punishes with judgment\". And in another
place \[Isa. 57, 16.\]: \"I will not be angry forever.\" But this is the
way of salvation, that he gives pious and diligent authorities, both in
the church and in the secular government; on the other hand, when he
wants to punish, he takes away the good authorities and lets children be
princes. Therefore, one must pray diligently for good authorities.

**V. 27. Zion must be redeemed by right.**

\(47\) First, this shall be done, that they may be justified, and the
sins of the people taken away.

After that, everything will be done right. But they will be redeemed
\"by righteousness\", not by their powers, that is, when they purify
their outward life and desist from evil. Zion will be restored by
righteousness, that is, when it will now have a gracious GOtt who has
remitted sin. Therefore, if we Germans today also want to escape the
punishment that is coming, which our ingratitude deserves, we do not
have to make supplications or processions, we do not have to hold
masses, but first we have to leave the outward misdeeds through
repentance; for that is \"the right\". Then, with simple faith, we must
take hold of the forgiveness of sin which the Gospel offers us. But this
is taught in vain; indeed, when they are reminded of it, they increase
the ungodliness of their hearts and works.

**V. 29. For they must become ashamed over the oaks.**

48 For so it must be read \[instead of: ab idolis in the Vulgate\]. But
he punishes idolatry with it. For in the groves, woods and gardens they
set up altars, just as our people made the building of churches the
highest level of worship.

**V. 31. When the protection will be like tow.**

No powers will be so great, no works and efforts of yours will be so
good, that they could protect you against these evils. Furthermore, what
the Latin translator has given by fortitudo, that is the name of an
idol, on whose ungodly service the idolaters defied.

**The second chapter.**

The kingdom of Judah was preserved after the Babylonian captivity so
that Christ would be born in it, as God had promised. Now, since in the
first chapter he describes the coming calamity

He had previously proclaimed, and yet at the same time promised, that he
would preserve the others, so he now adds, why he wants the others to be
preserved, namely for the sake of Christ. So this chapter is about

30 **L. XXII, 3S-38.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI,
43-46.** 31

It describes the spiritual kingdom of Christ, in which he reigns
everywhere through the word. But he does this in a beautiful order.

First, he recites: It will be when the church will grow to a very great
multitude. Then he says from where and from whom it will grow, namely
from the Gentiles. Thirdly, he also adds the way in which it will grow,
namely through the preaching of the Gospel. And here he also names the
place where this new preaching of grace should first be made known. This
is to be especially noted, so that we may know that Christ\'s kingdom is
not a physical kingdom, but a spiritual kingdom, which is ruled by the
scepter alone, as it is written in the 110th Psalm, v. 2, that is, by
the word of the gospel. Wherever this gospel is preached purely and
loudly, there is Christ\'s kingdom. And this mark of the church, or of
Christ\'s kingdom, cannot deceive you. For where the Word is, there is
the Holy Spirit, either with the hearer or with the teacher. The outward
good works can deceive, since they are also found in the pagans. That is
why the papacy is wrong, which thinks that there are other marks of the
church than the word. And because they say that they are the church
because they follow a different way of life, they deceive themselves.
For the word has always been the only, everlasting and unmistakable
characteristic of the church. The Jews also err, who wait for a bodily
kingdom of their Messiah. Fourth, he adds the fruits of the word, that
the Gentiles come to the knowledge of sin through the word, and
afterwards receive comfort and peace through this same word. The outward
life will also be very holy and innocent. Fifthly, he speaks of the
Jews\' displeasure that they would stumble against it and not accept the
kingdom of grace. Lastly, he adds a kind of extension, saying: \"If all
things together, both kingdoms and religions, are held against this
Christ, there is nothing against it. Therefore, accept the same, worship
him, adore him, or you will have to endure the greatest punishments for
the sake of your godlessness.

**V. 1. This (**verbum**) is what Isaiah the son of Amoz saw.**

The word dabar, which the Latin translator has given by verbum, \"the
word,\" has a much broader meaning among the Hebrews. For it means not
only a word, but a thing, cause, order in general 2c. More often,
however, it is taken for the neuter of the demonstrative pronoun hoc,
this. So it is also used here: \"This Isaiah saw\" 2c.

**V. 2. the mountain of the Lord will surely be (**praeparabitur)**.
g)**

Translate \[instead of praeparabitur in the Vulgate\^: \"will certainly
be.\" Although the prophet speaks of a physical place where this
preaching of the gospel was first to be made known, all these
magnificent promises are to be taken spiritually, namely, that the
church is a mountain raised and fortified above all other mountains, but
in the spirit. For if you look at the outward appearance of the church
from the beginning of the world, then from the time of the New
Testament, you will see that it is oppressed, despised, and hopeless.
Nevertheless, despite this contempt, it is \"exalted above all
mountains. For all the monarchies, all the kingdoms that have been in
the world until now, have perished; the Church alone endures and
triumphs over heresies, tyrants, Satan, sin, death and hell, and that
alone through the Word, alone through this despised and weak voice.

5 Furthermore, it is a great comfort that the physical place from which
this spiritual kingdom will first spring is so clearly foretold, so that
consciences can be sure that this word is true, which first began to be
taught in that corner of the Jews, so that \"Mount Zion\" is, as it
were, a rule for us, according to which we can judge all religions and
doctrines. The Alkoran of the

g\) From here on until the next Bible quotation, the first edition has
only: It is all to be understood spiritually, although he speaks of a
physical place. For there had to be a certain place where the preaching
of the gospel would first begin.

32 **L. XXII, 38-40.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 2, 2. 3.
**W. VI, 46-49.** 33

Turkism did not take its beginning in Zion, therefore it is a godless
doctrine. The various customs, laws, and human statutes of Pabstism did
not begin in Zion; consequently, they are ungodly and truly the
teachings of devils. Thus we can stand up against all other religions
and comfort our hearts that this alone is the true religion we profess.
Therefore, in the two most distinguished Psalms, namely the second and
the one hundred and tenth, Mount Zion is clearly indicated \[Ps. 2:6\]:.
\"I have set my king on my holy mountain Zion\"; likewise \[Ps. 110,
2.\]: \"The Lord will send the scepter of your kingdom out of Zion\" 2c.

**And will all heathens daznlaufen. ^h^)**

This kind and quality of this kingdom is also marvelous. The other
kingdoms are established and maintained by force and weapons, and men
are unwillingly obedient to them; but here, because the mountain is
raised, all the Gentiles will run to it, that is, they will come of
their own free will, not forced, they will be attracted by the virtues
of the church to join it. For what is sweeter and more sweet than the
preaching of the Gospel? It is a certain doctrine upon which consciences
are sure to lean; it offers a willing and benevolent God who gave His
Son, the eternal God, to death for the life of the world, that we
sinners might have forgiveness of sins through the ransom of His blood,
and righteousness along with eternal life through the power of His
resurrection; likewise victory over the world, sin, death, the devil,
and hell. Because the gospel promises and offers these things to all,
the Gentiles, who are troubled by their consciences because of their
sins, run to receive them with joy and accept the treasures of divine
mercy,

h\) Instead of §§ 6, 7 and 8, the 1532 edition contains the following:
Namely, voluntarily, not forced, as those who find themselves under your
law. Now other kingdoms are prepared by force and weapons; this one will
grow in such a way that the mountain will be raised. But here you see
that the outward preaching is not in vain. For by the ministry of the
word more is added to the church daily.

which the word shows and faith in the word appropriates.

\(7\) On the other hand, Moses, because he punishes sins and threatens
death to those who sin against the law, frightens the weak souls and
drives them to flee, despairing of their salvation. Thus, in a hidden
way, he included the description of Christ\'s kingdom in the word:
\"They will willingly run to it,\" which Christ explains with more words
in Matthew, Cap. 11, 12, where he says: \"The kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and those who do violence snatch it to themselves.\" As if he
wanted to say: People are not forced by force to the word of the gospel,
but they force themselves to it 2c.

8 The general term: \"all Gentiles\", is not to be understood in such a
way that all Gentiles should be converted. This is indeed the will of
God revealed in the Word, that he wants all to be saved \[1 Tim. 2:4\],
and therefore the gospel is spread throughout the whole world, so that
there is no place in which the gospel is not preached; but even though
not all accept the gospel, still some are converted everywhere. For the
gospel is not preached in vain, but sanctifies and produces fruit in
every place; as the prophet will say in the 55th chapter below, v. 10.
Accordingly, this passage serves to strengthen the ministers of the
word, so that they may not despair of the happy progress of the word
when they see that few hear it. For through the ministry of the Word,
more believers come to the church every day.

V. 3. **and many nations will say, Come.**

9 Here you see the worship, the works, the efforts and sacrifices of the
Christians. They do not boast that they will do these or those works;
they do not establish new ways of life, not new garments 2c., but they
consider this to be their one work, that they go to hear and to learn.
Not the hands, not the eyes 2c. are required, but the ears and the
heart; the rest of the members are all to serve the neighbor. These two,
the ears and the heart, are to serve GOD alone. For this kingdom is in
the word alone, and only those belong to it.

34 L. XXII, 40-43. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 49-52. 35

Rich, who always use the word, and always remain students of the word.

\(10\) The rest, as they are heretics, having once heard the gospel,
immediately become masters, and change the words of this prophet,
saying, Come, and let us go up, that we may teach him his ways, and walk
in our ways. So they have a disgust for the word, as for a known thing,
and seek new disputes, in which they may show their understanding, and
ingratiate themselves with the great multitude.

\(11\) But Christians know that the words of the Holy Spirit cannot be
fully learned as long as we are in the flesh. For Christianity is not in
knowledge, but in the position of the heart (affectu). This movement of
the heart can never fully believe the word because of the weakness of
the sinful flesh. Therefore, they always remain disciples, and chew the
word again, so that the heart may be awakened for and for by a new
flame, and not become sluggish, or get a disgust for the word. Add to
this the fact that we fall daily. For the flesh, death, sin, the world,
and Satan, the prince of the world, do not cease to attack us. We are
not safe from these enemies for a moment. If we do not always use the
Word, so that we can stand against Satan\'s attacks when we are tempted,
we are doomed. For sin is immediately followed by an evil conscience,
which can be raised by nothing but the Word of God, by which alone
Christians live and are nourished. The others, who leave the word,
gradually fall from one vice to another until they perish.

\(12\) Therefore Christianity must be placed in the hearing of the word
alone, and those who are pressed down either by spiritual or bodily
temptations should know that they have not the word in their hearts. If
they want to be set free, they must come to the Word again, and set
Christ before their eyes, who invites us \[Matth. 11, 28.\]: \"Come to
me, all you who are burdened.\" Likewise \[Joh. 11, 25.\]: \"I am the
resurrection and

I am not hell or death. If another temptation comes again, as it does,
you must again take refuge in Christ, who comforts us \[John 6:37\]:
\"Whoever comes to me, I will not cast out\" 2c. And you will certainly
feel the power of God in the word, through which it makes the believers
alive and blessed.

**He will teach us His ways.**

13\) \"The ways of the Lord\" are works, not ours, but of the Lord,
which He Himself works in us by His Spirit and Word;^i^ ) namely, that
He destroys the works of the devil, sin, death, sorrow, terror, and the
daily events by which we are hurried, and works in us the opposite good
things, as righteousness, life, joy, hope, patience 2c. These are
actually \"the ways of the Lord\" which his word, if we hear it and
believe it, brings. All other ways, which deviate from the word, are
erroneous and damned ways. But mark well, the word he will teach. For
Christians are always disciples.

**For from Zion will go forth the law.**

14 This is the cause of the increase of the church and the extension of
the kingdom of Christ, namely the preaching of the gospel. For here he
promises a new word. ^k^) For if he did not indicate a new doctrine,
what need would there be to promise anew the law, which was given so
many years before? And he clearly shows the difference, because he adds:
\"from Zion\"; as if he wanted to say: Before I gave the law on Mount
Sinai, now I will give another one on Mount Zion, which will not be a
teaching of works, but of faith; not of laws, but of grace; not
accusing, but communicating the forgiveness of sins 2c.

i\) Instead of the preceding, the 1532 edition has: \"He will teach, for
since Christians are constant students, they can never learn enough. The
ways of the Lord are the works which he himself works in us.\" The
following in this paragraph is missing there.

k\) The edition of 1532 continues here thus: \"From Zion shall go forth
the law, not, as before, from Sinai. \[V. 4.\] \'And he shall judgeü/
Now follow the fruits of the word; namely, The Spirit shall punish the
world because of sin; likewise: In me ye shall have peace.\" After this
the following is missing until 16 iiml.

36 **XXII, 43-45.** Brief Interpretation On Isaiah, Cap. 2, 4-9. **W.
VI, 52-55.** 37

V. 4. **And he will judge among the Gentiles.**

\(15\) Although this new preaching will begin in Zion, it will not stop
within Zion, but will also be spread among the Gentiles, judging and
punishing them, as Christ says in John \[Cap. 16, 8Z: \"The Spirit will
punish the world for sin.\" For this is the judgment, that they
recognize themselves as sinners, and that they are doomed to eternal
death by God\'s righteous judgment.

**There they will turn their swords into plowshares.**

Christ does not leave us in the terror that the preaching of repentance
produces in the souls of the godly, but he does a foreign work so that
he can do his work. In the beginning he kills through the law, so that
the new preaching of grace may give life, in which the forgiveness of
sins through his blood is given to all who believe in him \[Eph. 1, 7\].
This is that the prophet here describes with a fitting image the peace
that can neither be in the heart, nor by heart with other people, if the
souls are not certain of the forgiveness of sins. But no better means
can be found to abolish disunity than that used by Christ, who by one
saying accuses all alike of sins and condemns them. For on what account
should those who hear and believe these things quarrel, seeing that they
are by no means more righteous, holy, and wise than others? Therefore
Christians are easily agreed among themselves, who recognize that all
must be saved by the same grace, and that no one has merit or guilt
before another.

V. 5. **Come now from the house of Jacob. ^l^)**

17 The prophet sees the future fall of his people, therefore he
admonishes them, saying, \"To you especially belongs the gospel, to whom
it was promised so long before. Therefore, do not miss the time of
grace; walk in the light as long as you have it.

l\) Here follows in the 1832 edition, \"This is an exhortation: to you,
you Jews, the kingdom is promised, therefore do not miss the time of
grace.\" The following in

Now is the time pleasing to the Lord; if you miss it, the kingdom will
be taken from you and given to a people who bear its fruit.

V. 6. 7. **But you let your people, the house of Jacob, go.**

18\. this is the text of John \[Cap. 1, 11.\]: \"His own did not receive
him.\" Further, what the Latin interpreter has translated, *Quia repleti
sunt ut olim,* that should have been given thus, Projecisti populum
tuum, domum Jacob, *quia repleti sunt plus quam*^1^ ) *Orientales,* that
is, they are greater idolaters than the nations toward morning. For
because they are taken in by superstition, they do not accept the
gospel, which condemns all worship that is not prescribed by the word of
God. But the wicked do not suffer this, as can be seen in the prophets
who were killed by the unbelievers because they condemned the worship of
their own choice.

V. 8. 9. **Also their land is full of idols.**

\(19\) \"Idols\" are not only pillars and images, but any opinion that
an ungodly mind invents for itself about God, without the foundation of
Scripture. The opinion that the mass helps something by performing it
(*ex opere operato*) is an idol. The opinion that works are required for
justification before God is an idol. The opinion that God is pleased
with fasting, special clothing, certain rules of life, is an idol. Such
idols are worshipped by all those who perform such works in the opinion
that they will be justified thereby.

God does not want us to invent His service according to our thoughts,
but He says in Exodus 20:24: \"Where I will establish the remembrance of
My name, there I will come to you and bless you. Accordingly, he curses
all worship services that are chosen by us without a certain word; there
were countless such among the Jews at that time, as all the prophets
testify. And we see the same thing today in the heretics, who substitute
an image of their own devising for the word

1\) Huaua is added by us; it is missing in the editions.

38 L. xxii, 45-48. interpretations on the prophets. W.vi, 55-59. 39

God and worship it. But a harsh threat is added here, \"You will not
forgive them for this.\"

\(21\) For there is no hope of their recovery, nor can they be reminded
or taught; therefore they perish in their error. All other sins that we
recognize and do not defend are forgiven, but the sin that is defended
cannot be forgiven.

**V. 6. 7. They make much of the strange children.**

\(22\) This is to be understood of the false doctrine in which they
teach others and deceive them with it. But we find here an excellent
description of the false prophets. The first is that they deceive many
with their harmful teaching. The other is that they are stingy and belly
servants. For this is what he means by saying \[v. 7.\], \"Their land is
full of silver and gold, and there is no end of their treasures.\"
Third, they also seek riches and dominion: \"Their land is full of
horses, and there is no end of their chariots.\" Lastly, they do great
with their holiness, they prefer their religion to all, they boast of
God; as now they call themselves the church 2c. But such people should
be frightened by the terrifying threat that is added: \"You will not
forgive them\" 2c. because they sin against the Holy Spirit.

**V. w. Go into the rock.**

This is an address to the whole world. All you people go to the rock,
\"hide yourselves\". This power of the world is nothing. Christ\'s
kingdom will be such a kingdom that even the highest authorities, the
highest power and wisdom of the world will be afraid of its face; that
is how much Christ is to be held in honor. But these are words of faith,
for it can be seen quite differently. There is nothing weaker nor more
unformed than this Christ. On the other hand, the wicked reign and
flourish. Therefore, this glory is in faith alone. This is a glorious
passage from the time and worship of the New Testament.

**V. 11: But the Lord alone will be high.**

\(24\) Namely, by preaching and by the word of the gospel.

**V. 12. The day of the LORD of hosts.**

This is the day of the New Testament. For in the church, the weak
suffering of Christ is far more noble and glorious than the crowns of
all popes.

**V. 13-17. Also over all the high and lofty cedars of Lebanon.**

26 These words refer to worldly kingdoms, for the prophets often use the
word \"Lebanon\" to refer to the flourishing kingdoms because of the
tall cedars found on it. But he wants to indicate that Christ and the
Christians regard everything that is high in the world as low compared
to the riches that are in the kingdom of grace, where eternal
righteousness, life, and salvation are imparted to the believers.
Lebanon is on the north side, and Bashan on the east side, in the tribe
of Manasseh.

**V.18. And the idols will be finished completely.**

This goes to spiritual things. Neither in the worldly regime nor in
religion will there be anything that can be compared to this glory of
the future Christ.

**V. 19-21. Then one will go into the caves of the rocks.**

28 Now he says about religion what he had said before about the secular
government. Ye saints and ecclesiastics (religiosi), confess also that
all that is yours is nothing. He says: \"He will scourge the earth\",
that is, all the worships of God that reason has invented will also
disappear.

**V. 22. Let the man therefore depart.**

29 This is a summary: Therefore fear Christ, because he will come to
reign alone. But very many shall not suffer him, which ye, being his
people, ought not to do. \"Cease, he hath breath in his nostrils,\" that
is, he is mighty in his wrath. Thus says Lucas of Paulo Apost. 9, 1.:

*\^Αναπνέων την οργήν\^* spirans iram \[But Saul snorted\].

30\. it is therefore the whole body, from the

40 k. XXII, 48-50. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 3, 1-7. W. VI,
59-62. 41

The first words, v. 10: \"Go into the rock\" 2c. to the end of the
chapter, are a kind of rhetorical expansion. Until now, he wants to say,
there were many gods and lords; but now we will have One Lord and God,
One Religion, One Faith.

have one baptism. For Christ rules over all things through the gospel.
Everything else is nothing, whether in worldly government or in
religion, if it is held against this Christ.

**The third chapter.**

In the previous chapter he described the power of the kingdom of Christ,
now he threatens the Jews, who would not accept Christ, with desolation.
Therefore this text is a historical text for the Jews, but also a
prophetic text for our times, against the godless persecutors of the
word and the servants of the word. But it was a very foolish preaching
among the Jews, so often the prophets threatened the desolation of the
people of God. For thus they boasted: We have the promises that this
kingdom and this priesthood, which is instituted and ordered by God,
will remain; God does not lie; and as those in Jeremiah \[Cap. 18, 18.\]
say: \"The priests cannot err in the law.\" And ours boast a like thing
of their Church nowadays: the little ship of Peter may waver, but it
cannot sink. But we see how these threats have come to pass among the
Jews. Therefore, our people should be warned by this example that they
should not be presumptuous about the title of the church. It is true
that the church will remain; but in the subordinate (minore) they
deceive themselves, that they say they are the church, and therefore are
presumptuous. Further, he describes the future desolation by some
stages, and certainly predicts that famine and sedition would occur,
both of which things brought Jerusalem to the highest misery at that
time when it was besieged by the Romans, as Josephus reports.

**V. 1-4. Childish ones shall rule over them.**

2 Notice the way God destroys great kingdoms. For he takes away the
heads in religion, and the wise men in the worldly government, and lets

ignorant people remain, who have no experience. For he calls boys
(pueros), not who are boys in age, but in intellect.

V. 5. **and the people will drudge** (Et corruet).

3\. so it is better translated: Exactores erunt in populo, vir in virum
etc. \[which has given Vulgate by: Et irruet )\]. \[which the Vulgate
has given by: Et irruet^1^ )\]. As if he wanted to say: The more
powerful one will be, the more right he will be.

**The younger will be proud against the old.**

4 This indicates the turmoil. For when Jerusalem was besieged by the
Romans, there were three captains in the city who were fiercely hostile
to one another, and they were more severely oppressed by the sedition of
their own citizens than by the siege of the enemy.

V. 6. 7. **Then one will seize his brother from his father\'s house.**

\(5\) This is how it is with riots: when the best people are out of the
way, everyone wants to have a leader. Furthermore, Isaiah indicates such
a need that even if someone were to be found who would be skilled to
lead others, he would still not be able to be brought by force to accept
a magisterial office for fear of the riot.

**You have clothes.**

6\. the choice is not made on the basis of prudence, justice and
worthiness, but on the basis of

1\) irruet put by us according to the Vulgate, while the editions offer:
Lorruet.

42 is. xxn, so-52. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, vL-vv. 43

only in terms of violence and forces, that one puts all respectability
out of sight. This is a beautiful picture of turmoil.

V. 8. **for Jerusalem is falling away.**

That is, I do not have so much ability in me that I could control such
great evil.

**Because her tongue 2c.**

This is the sin by which Christ is denied and rejected. \"The tongue\"
is the teaching of the Pharisees; \"the doing\" is hypocrisy and the sin
of stiff-neckedness, that they would not believe the many miracles
performed, but with hardened necks resisted the Holy Spirit.
Furthermore, the \"deeds\" that the prophet condemns are the very best
works in which they boasted of their holiness against faith.

**That they resist the eyes of his majesty.**

9 This indicates that they sin against the Holy Spirit out of malice,
not ignorance, which is as much as \"resisting the eyes of His majesty.
This sin can no longer go unpunished. It also presses our Germany today.
For the adversaries condemn our doctrine, which they themselves confess
does not violate any article of faith. They condemn priestly marriages,
which they profess are not forbidden by divine law. They condemn to the
point of absurdity both forms of Holy Communion, which they must confess
that God Himself commanded and instituted. They stubbornly defend the
mass, which they confess has been used for many ungodly abuses.
Therefore, punishment can no longer be withheld from us, for there is no
hope of repentance for this sin. For it is the sin against the Holy
Spirit, with which one resists the recognized truth.

V. 9. **Her nature she has no secret. 1)**

10\. the knowledge of the face is taken here passively, that is, their
recognized face; that is, they confess they can see their

**1) Vulgate: vultns eorumcus .**

Sin does not excuse. But he indicates that they sin out of wickedness;
just as I see in the Gospel. For although the Pharisees are convinced by
the word and the miracles, they do not yield. But because a part of our
princes and bishops also sin so manifestly, we can also prophesy against
them that they will perish.

**V. 10. 11. Tell the righteous that they have it good.**

11\. He now comforts the godly; as Psalm 2:12: \"His wrath will soon
burn. But good to them that trust in him.\" Thus Abraham, Lot, and other
saints were preserved, as were the apostles and the rest of the Jews
when Jerusalem was besieged. For the Lord knows how to save the
righteous.

V. 12. 13. **My people, your comforters deceive you.**

12\. he adds this against those who comforted the people against these
threats of the prophet, saying: \"nothing will come of all these things;
you are God\'s people\"; as they said with the prophet Micah \[Cap. 2,
6\]: \"such tears do not befall us; we will not be disgraced like this
2c. Therefore he saith \[v. 13\], It shall surely come to pass, \"The
LORD standeth there, he will judge\"; as it is written in the 7th Psalm,
v. 13, \"He hath bent his bow, he hath aimed.\"

V. 14. **He comes with the elders of his people and with his princes.**

13 This is with the apostles. Because they see that the word is despised
by the synagogue, they leave it and go to the Gentiles, leaving the Jews
to be destroyed by the Gentiles.

**For you have spoiled the vineyard.**

14\. you do not cease from corrupting and seducing. Therefore, the
punishment will no longer be far from you.

**V.** 16. **Therefore the daughters of Zion are proud.**

15 Now he also threatens the women, as before the men. But he punishes
them for the

44 L. xxn, 52-S4. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 3, 16. 17. 25.
26. w.vi,\"\"-\"\". 45

Security and impenitence, that they said, We are daughters of Abraham,
we will suffer nothing of all that you threaten.

**V. 17. Thus the LORD will make the crown of the head of the daughter
of Zion bald.**

16 By this image he indicates that they would lose the temporal
government and the priesthood. For these were the highest gifts in this
people. The revelation of the disgrace can be taken in the same way as
Ezek. 16, 37.ff \"of the desolation of the kingdom; or that the Lord
will then reveal the wickedness and godlessness of the Jews to the whole
world.

**V. 25. Your men will fall by the sword.**

17 Namely, those by whose protection you hope to be safe.

**V. 26. And their gates will mourn.**

This is poetically spoken. As if he wanted to say: Erit ubique plurima
mortis imago

\[everywhere will be the image of death and in many guises\], as the
poet says.

Cap. 4, 1. **that seven women will take hold of one man at that time.**

That is, there will be such a great shortage of men, because so many of
them remained in the war, that the women will offer themselves to the
men of their own free will. But this revenge of God on the \"Jew\" is
still going on today. Let us therefore learn from this passage that we
should not be hopeful of God\'s gifts, whether spiritual or physical,
but use them with thanksgiving, to the praise of Him who bestowed them
on us unworthy ones. For God can suffer nothing less than presumption
and arrogance. He wants to give superfluously, but in such a way that we
may humble ourselves and serve Him; not be secure, as the Jews were then
and the papists are now; the latter because they had the name of the
Church, but the latter because they had the name of the people of God.

1\) Virg. Aen., lib II, v. 369: Luctus, ubique pavor, et plurima mortis
imago.

**The fourth chapter.**

1\) He foretold the miserable fall of the Jewish kingdom, now he
comforts the remaining ones again and says: the best part of the people
will be left, who shall receive the glorious promises of the kingdom of
Christ, as it is also said in Jeremiah: 2) I have left me a grape. And
Moses in his song Deut. 32, 36: \"The Lord has mercy on his servants.\"

2 Furthermore, he uses this order: First, he says that the kingdom of
Christ will be glorious and magnificent. Then he explains what this
glory is, namely that Christ will give the church excellent gifts.
First, he sanctifies her. Secondly

2\) In the Wittenberg edition in the margin: \"Hiers.b\" sv. 9\]. The
old translator has: Jer. 15, II. But neither seems to fit us well.

he will forgive sins, and kill the flesh and the old man. Third, he will
stand by in danger, protect from violence, comfort in adversity 2c.

**V. 2. At that time the branch of the Lord will be dear and valuable.**

3\. \"The branch of the Lord\" and \"the fruit of the earth\" is Christ.
This one, he says, will show himself in his majesty and glory, he will
be exalted above all his enemies, he will live, and give us all things
superfluous. But all this is done through the word. m) But for this
reason he calls Christ \"the branch of the Lord,\" so that he may give
us a new life against the vexation of the

m\) Instead of what follows in this paragraph, the 1532 edition has: But
he calls Christ a branch of the Lord because he is weak in the world,
crucified and despised, but glorious in the eyes of God.

46 L. xxn, S4-S7. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, \[s-71. 47

The Lord says, \"Do not be mistaken by this outward appearance. Let not,
saith he, this outward appearance deceive thee. For though Christ is
weak in the world, crucified and despised, yet in the eyes of the Lord
he is glorious, and the right branch.

**V. 3. and who will be left in Zion.**

Not only will Christ be such in his person, but he will also distribute
these riches among the rest of the people, who will be called saints
because God will dwell in them and they will be dedicated only to divine
use.

**V. 4. by the Spirit who will judge and kindle a fire.**

5\. this piece also belongs to the distribution of the riches that are
in Christ; because the Spirit immediately kills the flesh, so that the
outward members of the body also may depart from unrighteousness, and we
may live innocently. For those who are justified are cleansed and washed
away daily by the Holy Spirit. For we are daily challenged by various
sins, that we may know, partly in ourselves and partly in others, what
wickedness is in our hearts, and that we may feel the power of Christ
against sin, who dwells in us through His Spirit.

\(6\) But the prophet ascribes to the Holy Spirit a twofold office. The
\"Spirit of judgment\" is with whom Christ exercises judgment, that he
may condemn, cleanse, and kill the old man. But \"the spirit of
judgment\" refers to \"filthiness\"; as John also calls him a spirit
that punisheth \[John 16:8.\]. \"A spirit of fire\" he is called,
because he does not grow weary, but continues fiercely, and impels that
we should grow and become stronger from day to day. But \"the spirit of
fire\" refers to \"the blood,\" that is, to the blood debt. For our
heart is unclean, and we are all death-believers before God.

**V. 5. 6. And the LORD will create over all the dwelling place of Mount
Zion, and where it is gathered, clouds and smoke of the day.**

So far he has described the riches of Christ\'s kingdom, the
distribution of spiritual gifts, and the power and effect of
purification. But because Satan cannot suffer this knowledge, and
because our King is a hidden King, and because we have not been given
weapons to avenge ourselves, but have been commanded to endure and bear,
he now touches the cross. ^n^) The Lord, he says, will protect and
defend Zion, that is, his church, which is in danger for the sake of
this branch. Christ will be the right \"cloud\", that is, he will
refresh and comfort his own. And he will be a \"fire\" that will shine
in the temptations. In him the believers will have strength and power
2c. ^o^)

8 The prophet makes a double challenge, one of the \"heat\" and the
other of the \"rain\"; one of the \"fire\" and the other of the
\"water\" and promises that Christ will be our protector so that we will
not be hurt. So also in Matthew, Cap. 7, 24, 25, it is said of the house
built on a rock that it would stand against the violence of the winds
and the floods of the waters. Accordingly, this passage teaches that the
powers of Christians rest in Christ alone, and in no other thing, which
we will explain a little more broadly.

n\) Instead of the preceding in this paragraph, the 1532 edition has:
Now he also touches the cross.

o\) Here the 1532 edition continues: \"The prophet makes a double
challenge, one of the heat, the other of the rain. The heat is when the
conscience feels the wrath of God in persecution, and takes up the cross
as a certain sign of divine wrath. When this outward evil, with which we
are plagued, is joined by the inward temptation of the conscience, and
Satan increases the despair, so that man is plagued from within as well
as from without, then only is the heat really felt. But here the souls
must be reminded of the will of God, namely that God does not chastise
us for the sake that we should despair and perish, but that it is a
fatherly chastisement, so that we do not become arrogant, and so that we
learn about ourselves, and that Satan also sees that the word of God is
invincible, and that it sustains and delivers us in all misfortunes, be
they as great as they may. But you should diligently realize that no
efforts, merits and works that are ours can be of use to us in the
temptations, but that all our strength rests on Christ alone, who
protects us through his word as a cloud. The rain is the outward
attacks. But no one understands this unless he is taught by
experience.\" This is followed by st 11,

48 **2.- XXII, 57-5\".** Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 4, 5. 6.
**W. VI, 71-75.** 49

At the time of persecution, the conscience is naturally struck with the
fear of divine wrath. For because it feels the present punishment, it
immediately makes the conclusion (colligit ex posteriori): You are being
afflicted now, therefore God hates you. Such is our nature, and by
following it, the prophets call it God\'s wrath, when He visits His own
with a cross, while in fact and truth it is not God\'s wrath, but a love
rut. Satan also adds to this and increases the despair, so that the
heart doubts God\'s grace and begins to fear God and to hate Him as an
executioner, so that one feels pain and fear on both sides, outwardly in
the flesh and inwardly in the conscience. This is actually the heat of
which the prophet speaks here, by which the conscience is parched.

\(10\) Here the Holy Spirit is needed to teach us, and a devout brother
to remind and instruct us that God wants nothing else than to improve us
with a fatherly heart, and to show us His power and the power of the
Word, which finally triumphs, so that we may learn, and Satan may also
see, that the Word is an invincible power of God, against which the
gates of hell can do nothing, and so that the power of the Holy Spirit,
who dwells in us, may be glorified. Whoever, without this protection of
the Word, looks to princes and to the common people, of whom we have
seen many, will be deceived, as the Scripture says: Whoever relies on
men will perish. But just as reliance on men is forbidden, so also God
is offended when we throw away faith and fear men too much. As he says
to Ahaz in chapter 7, v. 4: \"Do not be afraid, and let your heart be
undaunted before these two smoking fires of fire. But Ahaz gave him no
ear, just as we are all by nature faithless against the divine promises.
But he who believes the word will surely be saved. For this is our only
protection. For the frightened and weak souls cannot be raised up by
human hands. Here the word is necessary;

whoever grasps this feels refreshment and cooling for the heat.

The rain, however, is the outward attacks, from which not the conscience
but the body feels discomfort. Therefore, in this place Christ is
presented to us as our shield in all tribulations, both spiritual and
physical. But this cannot be understood without experience, which alone
makes a divine scholar. The heretics will one day have to feel the sun
without having an umbrella, because they reject the flesh of Christ and
walk only against the mere majesty. They will not feel this for a while
when they are out of the temptation, but when the temptation will seize
them, they will fall suddenly.

\(12\) For he who is challenged must be told that he does not stumble
after the divine majesty and the terrible works of this majesty. For God
does not want us to recognize Him in this way; therefore He does not
want to deal with mere men, but He has hidden Himself in our flesh,
which we can grasp and take hold of. We cannot grasp the divine majesty
unless we want to grasp a consuming fire. And Satan cannot overthrow us
more easily in any other way than when he has led us to the
contemplation of majesty. It is so great that the mind must soon fall
into despair. For this reason Solomon also reminded \[Proverbs 25:27,
Vulg.\], \"He that searcheth after majesty shall be crushed with the
glory of it.\" The cause is this, because we are by nature forward. Now
majesty, as an inexhaustible fountain, presents infinite examples, from
which spring infinite and exceedingly dangerous questions, such as: why
did God permit the fall of Judas? why did he let Peter come to grace
again? 2c. Through such disputations, the hearts are gradually
accustomed to vain questions, so that they quarrel with God as with a
potter, whereupon the fall inevitably follows.

Therefore, one must refrain from such thoughts. For if God would have
wanted to be known by us in this way, then

50 L. xxli, 59-si. Interpretations on the prophets. W.vi, 75-77. 51

he did not come into the flesh. But for this reason he held out his
flesh to us, that we might cling to it and grasp and understand it to
some extent. So he does not let Philip, who was too forward in asking
him about the Father, wander higher, but leads him back to himself and
says: \"Philip, he who sees me sees my Father. You must not seek the
Father apart from me, or imagine that the Father can be known without
me; behold me, and you have also seen the Father. For before the face of
the Majesty no man can stand, but must look unto Christ alone.

14 Therefore let us not listen to those who say, \"The flesh is of no
use. Rather, turn it around and say: God without flesh is of no use. For
on Christ\'s flesh, on the child who hangs on the Virgin\'s breasts, the
eyes must be firmly fixed, so that one may take courage and say: I have
no God, neither in heaven nor on earth, nor do I know of any other,
except the flesh which lies in the womb of the Virgin Mary. If you say
this, there is no fear that you will deviate from God, or that your
heart will be brought to despair by terror and fear.

For God is otherwise incomprehensible in all other ways, but only in the
flesh of Christ is He comprehensible. In this Christ you see nothing but
the highest sweetness and kindness, who voluntarily took upon himself
the death of the cross for us, so that we, freed from sins, might have
his righteousness through faith in him and eternal life. Through this
sight the mind is raised and life is received. All the rest are images
of wrath and death, none of which is more dangerous than the image of
the divine majesty. But he who thus takes Christ into his heart

After this, he can safely climb up to the Father and deal with him, as
he says \[John 14:6\]: \"I am the way. But the ways that are apart from
Christ, on which one wants to ascend to the Father or to the divine
majesty, are all slopes on which no one can stand, but must fall down.

\(16\) Therefore I remind and exhort you, dear fathers and brethren,
beware of such high thoughts, by which faith and hope are taken away,
heaven is shut up, and hell is opened. But learn diligently what the
prophet here reminds you, that Christ alone is set apart to be a screen
and a shade for those who endure adversity from the heat and the rain.
To this one fix your eyes, to this one cling, as you are also reminded
by God\'s voice: \"Him you shall hear.\" Whoever hears another, whoever
looks to anything else besides this flesh, is lost. For this alone
shields us from the heat that comes from contemplating the divine
majesty; it alone protects us from the rain and the violence of Satan.
This shadow gives us cooling, that the thoughts of wrath may pass. For
there can be no wrath where you see that the Son of God is given to
death for you, that you may live. That is why I put to your heart the
designations of Christ, with which here the prophet adorns him, that he
is \"a tabernacle for shade from the heat, and a refuge and hiding place
from the weather and rain\". In the same way Paul also draws all things
to this Christ, since he speaks \[Col. 2, 9.\]: \"In him dwelleth all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily.\" He is therefore presented to us as
the seat of grace \[Rom. 3, 25\], so that we may not despair, depart
from God, and be frightened by other hateful images besides Christ, in
whom alone is our victory and life.

52 **L. XXII, 61-63.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 5, 1-6. **W.
VI, 77-81.** 53

**The fifth chapter.**

The prophet now repeats the threat of the future desolation, but under a
different image. As if he wanted to say: Well then, they will not be
moved by these threatening words; therefore I will also make a song of
this matter, whether they can be brought to repentance in this way.
\"The vineyard\" is the Jewish people, which God has fenced in with His
law. The delicious \"vines\" are the holy judges and kings, Joshua,
David 2c. \"The Tower\" is the worship and its word, which GOD gave from
heaven, and belong to the exercise of faith. \"The cellars\" is the
killing of the old man, of which Rom. 12, 1. is spoken, and which
belongs to the use of spiritual killing. It is the same if you take it
for the altar of burnt offering on which a bruised spirit is offered 2c.
\"The host\" is the outward gross sins, that they were robbers,
adulterers, slayers, who killed the holy prophets and Christ.

2 But he enumerates all this according to the order. First he praises
his good deeds, which he has done for the synagogue. Then he says how
the synagogue has not behaved properly against such important good
deeds. Third, he threatens devastation. Fourth, he makes a register of
their sins. But he adds to every sin its punishment. In the fifth place,
he returns to the threat, and, in order to add a greater terror to them,
he adds a description of the people by whom the synagogue was to be
devastated. Accordingly, it is all far more terrible than could be
understood of the Babylonian captivity.

**V. i. Well, I will sing to my beloved a song of my cousin from his
vineyard.**

3 He calls Christ his cousin. For Isaiah also was of the tribe of Judah.

**My beloved has a vineyard in a fat place** (in cornu filio olei).

4\. the word cornu \[horn\] is taken for an elevated and fortified
place, of the

same it means so much as a power, an empire, dominion 2c. And by this
designation the prophet indicates that the Jewish empire was strong and
powerful. But that he adds filio oleii is a Hebrew expression. For the
Hebrews often use the name filius when they want to express a
possession. Therefore it is suitably explained by the word \"have\" with
the noun to which it refers, as, cornu filio olei, that is, cornu, quod
habet oleum \[a horn that has oil\]. The meaning is therefore this:
Christ has his vineyard in a secure place, because of divine protection,
furthermore also in a fruitful and fat place. What more, then, could he
have given? since he has given them power and abundance. But this one
thing is left, that they should make good use of these benefits 2c.

V. 3. 4. **Now judge, you citizens of Jerusalem.**

5 This is, as it were, a summary: What more could I have done?

**V. 5. 6. His wall shall be taken away.**

6 He repeats the punishment of the last desolation of the synagogue; it
shall come to pass that the priesthood shall be taken away from them, so
that nowhere shall be found people who teach the word. For the ministers
of the Word are those who prune and hoe the vineyard. Thus the Jews
today have neither the Word nor prophets nor the worship of God, and
thus they have at the same time lost the worldly rule, which never
happened to them before. For during the time of the captivity there was
still a spark of the kingdom left. For the king Jechoniah was still
alive, and there were still prophets when Daniel, Ezekiel 2c.

**That thistles and thorns grow on it.**

7\. thorns are the best works, according to appearance, as those of the
Pharisees were, and with us are those of the monks, by which the foolish
common people are knitted. Thus

54 L. xxn, 63-66. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 8i-8ö. 55

It cannot be otherwise, where the law is not taught, sins cannot be
properly punished and corrected. For the law is the light for the
knowledge of sins; if this is not there, the thorns inevitably grow;
that is, instead of good works, hypocrisy prevails.

**And will command the clouds that they rain not upon it.**

The clouds are the apostles and the preaching of the Gospel. But this is
the greatest misfortune of all, when the word of God is taken away, in
which alone the forgiveness of sins, the favor and grace of God, and
eternal life are offered. All this is taken away at the same time as the
external word, and nothing remains but accusation and guilt that cannot
be forgiven, the wrath and judgment of God, and finally eternal death.
Therefore, we must pray that the kingdom of God, for the sake of our
ingratitude and sins, may not be taken away from us and given to a
people who bring forth its fruits \[Matth. 21, 43\].

**V. 7. He waits for justice.**

\(9\) This is the first kind of the host, namely, the avarice of the
authorities. They should judge rightly, but they do nothing but oppress
and afflict the subjects with their oppressions and injustices. Nor do
they have mercy on the poor, for this is what he calls \"justice.

**V. 10. For ten acres of vineyard shall yield but one bucket.**

\(10\) It will be a very great harvest. If you count on a rich grape
harvest, it will happen that ten fields will hardly yield a jug of wine.
Furthermore, notice here that God punishes the stinginess of the people
with theurung, as we also experience today. For since the world does not
punish stinginess, God punishes it with anger. For the profit does not
come from our great labor, but from the divine blessing. When God gives
His blessing, everything grows very abundantly; but if

God puts a curse on the land, nothing grows. Therefore, the godly may
learn here how to build their fields; namely, first with prayer, then
also to be bountiful; then God will bless them.

**V. 11: Woe to those who are up early in the morning.**

\(11\) This is the other kind of wickedness, namely drunkenness. Note
that almost the same vices are mentioned here that Christ punishes in
Matth. 23, 13. ff.

**V. 12. They do not look at the work of the Lord.**

12\. \"They do not look at the work of the Lord\"; that is, at what God
demands and wants from them, namely, that they believe God and fear Him,
and do good to their neighbor.

**V. 13. Therefore my people will have to suffer hunger.**

This famine was described by Josephus.

**V. 16 But the LORD of hosts will be exalted in judgment.**

014 This shall the LORD do, that he may destroy the wicked, and also
save the godly. And so by him justice will be exalted when he punishes
the ungodly, so that it must be said: The LORD is a righteous judge on
earth 2c.

**V. 17: Then the lambs will feed.**

15 He comforts the godly. The apostles and remnant of the faithful will
have the word of God with which they will be pastured superfluously.

**Woe to those who tie themselves together with loose cords to do
wrong.**

16\. this is the third type of. Heerlinge. For he speaks against the
secure and stiff-necked prophets who comforted the people against these
threats of the prophet. They comforted the people against the prophet\'s
threats by relying on their carnal righteousness. Furthermore, it is a
Hebrew expression that he says: \"they pull at the injustice as at a
truck\", that is, they lead in

**56 L.** xxii, **66-68.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 5,
18-26. W. vi, **8S-88. 57**

their injustice, they did not want to let themselves be corrected. 2c.
He calls the laws and statutes by which they fasten \"injustice\", that
is, the seemingly highest holiness, \"ropes\".

**V. 20: Woe to those who call evil good and good evil.**

\(17\) This fourth kind of host is against the blasphemers who condemned
the word of the prophet and extolled their doings and teachings. But for
the most part it goes against the masters and teachers. For he does not
speak of the good that is in creatures, or of something that is
outwardly good, but he speaks of the word that is truly good. First,
because it teaches what is right and good, and guides us in peril so
that we do not perish. Second, it is a light, because it teaches in
tribulations, and does not forsake those who are forsaken by all human
help. Thirdly, it is also sweet, because it is life and brings peace to
souls. So we should give this honor to the word, thinking that the word
is good. But the opposite happens: What is good, they call evil, the
light darkness 2c. Therefore they take their human doctrines, teach them
and practice them as if they were the most delightful doctrine, because
they bring bread into the house. So I take this passage from words, not
from gold or from pleasure. For these are only evil when they are
misused; but error and ungodly opinions are absolutely evil.

**Woe to those who are wise in themselves and think themselves wise.**

\(18\) This can be applied both to the teachers and to the disciples.
But they are those of whom also Paul says in the Epistle to the Romans,
Cap. 1, 22: \"Thinking themselves wise, they became fools.\" And in the
proverbs the xxxxxxxx are often reproved. For the φιλαυτία*,* or conceit
that one is wise oneself, is the most pernicious vice, by which hearts
are prevented from accepting punishment or being reformed; but they are
intent only on one thing, that they may be admired by others. Thus we
see

Heretics never think about whether what they teach is true or not. For
they think they are wise, and therefore they cannot err. But we, who
want to be true Christians, should be ready to be taught by every child.
After that, we should carefully examine what we follow to see if it is
in accordance with the faith and the word of God, so that our wisdom is
connected with the fear of God; otherwise it will be an unfortunate
wisdom.

**V. 24: Therefore, as the flame of the fire consumes straw.**

19 He describes herewith the exceedingly great speed of the devastation.
All yours will be as weak as straw against the flame; you will not be
able to resist the punishment. These are figurative speeches; \"the
root\" stands for the noblest, and \"the shoots\" for the subjects, but
especially for the young people.

**For they despise the law of the LORD of hosts.**

20\. the punishments of the other sins are bearable; the blasphemy alone
God punishes with the most severe desolation, and exterminates the
despisers with stump and handle. Thus Jerusalem and the whole Jewish
people, thus Babylon, thus Rome were devastated; the same will happen to
Germany.

**V. 25. He stretches out his hand over them.**

21 Thus the Jews are still miserably scattered to this day.

**V. 26. For he will raise a banner.**

22\. now he also describes the people who will destroy the Jews. But it
is all to be understood by the Romans.

**Hurriedly and quickly they come along.**

\(23\) The prophet here presents an excellent image (hypotyposin), and
he does this because he would like to bring his own to repentance from
the bottom of their hearts. And this is the reason that the prophets use
various images and ornaments, by which they hope to achieve something
with the unrepentant.

58xxii , 68-70. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 88-92. 59

24\. But a blinded heart cannot recognize its sins, not even when it
feels the blows; or, when it recognizes them, it despairs, like Pharaoh.
We see the same in the heretics, who cannot be corrected by any
punishment. For when they are punished by God because of their sin, they
say that they suffered for righteousness. Even today, the Jews say that
they have done well by crucifying Christ, even though they are miserably
tormented with the most severe punishments. Thus the Anabaptists
willingly suffer death because they imagine that their opinion is right
and good. For they are possessed; therefore they should not be killed,
but rather locked up in a place and kept in check as raging people, and
rather prayed for. But keep us from this sin, that we think ourselves
righteous \[in sins\], for it is not forgiven. So the more such

The more people are punished, the more they boast; the more they are
praised, the more they rage 2c.

**V. 27. No one\'s belt comes off his loins.**

25 That is, they are always ready in arms, they never lay down the
sword.

**V.30. And will roar over them at that time like the sea.**

26\. This means the weeping of the Jews, that they will weep for their
misfortune.

**When you will then look at the country.**

That is, the saddest horrors of death will appear everywhere. Everywhere
there will be despair and mourning, to such an extent that even this
lovely light of heaven will be unpleasant to them.

**The sixth chapter.**

This chapter contains a vision of the future extermination of the
synagogue. For the prophet is very rich in words, therefore he has often
presented one and the same thing with changed words; as if he wanted to
say: I have predicted the future disaster by a prophecy, likewise also
by a song. Now I want to add a face of this very thing, whether perhaps
some would like to be corrected and set right again.

Furthermore, the whole first part of the face is set against the
Pharisaic righteousness and the presumption of the Jews. ^p^) For they
were wonderfully presumptuous about their righteousness, worship,
kingdom and priesthood, Rom. 9, 4. ff. They were so blinded by this
glory that they would not listen to any prophet who threatened them.

p\) From here to the words in i?3: \"I have seen the HCrrn sitting\",
the edition of 1532 has only the following: For because they trusted in
the temple and worship which they had, the prophet therefore terrifieth
them, saying, Your temple is nothing.

spoke. Thus they also made the objection to Christ in the Gospel
\[Matth. 3, 9\]: We have God as our Father, we are children of Abraham
2c. Hardened by this presumption, they did nothing with fear, but
despised all the threats of the prophets, trusting in the temple and in
the service of God that they had.

\(3\) Therefore, the prophet frightens them and wants to instruct them
to seek a higher service, against that fleshly presumption. For the
temple was not built by Solomon in such a way that he meant that God
could be enclosed in it, but that the service instituted by God should
last until Christ, for the sake of outward discipline and instruction,
not so that they should think they were righteous because of the temple
and safe from all the misfortune their sins deserved. What then, saith
he, do ye boast of the temple? Your temple is nothing. I have seen the
Lord sitting over the temple, and he is not in the temple.

60 xxii, 7\"-72. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 6, 1-5. W. vi,
92-95. 61

For your temple, on which you are so presumptuous, can hardly contain
the hem of its garment; that is, your very highest righteousness is
barely the outermost surface of true righteousness. And you have no
cause to boast of being God\'s servants because of it.

4\. for he has others than you are, who are \"seraphim\", burning with
love for God, who are not hypocrites like you are. They have \"six
wings\", so that they also surpass in number of wings those cherubim of
Moses, who have only two wings (Mos. 25, 20.). But their reverence for
God is so great that they \"cover their faces\" and out of reverence for
Him they do not dare to look at Him. They are not puffed up with any
confidence of righteousness and presumption, as you who walk uprightly,
without fear of GOD, in your righteousness. \"They also cover their
feet,\" they boast none either of their works or merits; indeed, they do
not want to be seen and appear before GOD. (For \"walk\" means the walk
of life and works.) \"With two wings they fly,\" and serve GOD, not with
their works, but with their voice alone. Therefore, your holiness is not
something of which you presume. God alone is holy, and the truest
worship is a pure and simple confession. The rest of what we have are
gifts given to us, which must be covered 2c. so that we are not
presumptuous of them. Thus he secretly punishes the Jews. This is the
short epitome of this face.

V. 1-4. **All the earth is full of his glory.**

\(5\) \"All the earth,\" not your temple alone, as you measure
yourselves. For everything is aimed at beating down their presumption on
their worship of God. But this too must be noted in passing, that the
prophet says he has seen the Lord, while he has seen him only in the
face. And yet he calls that which he has seen in the face the Lord. And
this is what we also say about the sacrament, that whoever sees this
bread has seen the true body of Christ, contrary to the error of the
sacramentists. For one often speaks of a part, like

of the whole, which is composed of parts, and the form of the Lord,
likewise the Lord, are rightly taken in figurative speech for one and
the same. Thus the body of the Lord and the bread of the Lord are taken
for one, so that he who ate this bread is said to have eaten the body of
Christ; just as Isaiah says that he saw the Lord when he saw the form of
the Lord. For in this way both are signified, that which a thing
contains, and that which is contained in it. The same way of speaking is
this \[Matth. 3, 17.\]: \"This is my dear Son\"; likewise, \[V. 16.\]:
\"He saw the Holy Spirit in the form of a dove\" 2c.

V. 5 **Then I said, Woe is me, I perish** (quia tacui).

This is the other piece of the face. The verbum, which the Latin
translator has given by tacui (I have been silent), is translated: \"I
perish\", that is, I am swallowed up in eternal death, because I have
seen the Lord, according to the word: \"No man shall live who sees God\"
(Ex. 33, 20.).

**Because I am impure lips.**

\(7\) Here the prophet is challenged for the doctrine that he has not
done the word aright, and he holds that he must be condemned with the
false prophets; as is wont to happen in such terrors and temptations.
But here it should be noted that all teachers of the law, however holy
they may be, nevertheless have unclean lips, because the law leads no
one to perfection, neither the teacher nor the hearers. But this is a
true defilement only when one hopes to attain righteousness from the
law, which is given for the revelation of unrighteousness. Therefore,
Isaiah condemns himself and the people that they are sinners and says
that another service must be established than the law and the works of
the law, namely the service that the seraphim render to God, in which
one takes refuge in the divine mercy and asks for forgiveness because of
the sins. This service is the

**62** xxn, 72-75. exegeses on the prophets. W. vi, 95-W. **63**

Fear of God, which works repentance, and faith, which believes in the
forgiveness of sins 2c.

V. 6. 7. **Then one of the seraphim flew to me.**

8\) Confession is followed by the forgiveness of sins. In order for the
prophet to be certain of this, he receives both a sign and a word.

\(9\) This passage is also worthy of note because it informs us of the
use and benefit of the signs which the Sacramentans say are only outward
signs of confession. The word by which the prophet is raised up is this,
that he heard from one of the seraphim, \"Thy iniquity is taken away
from thee\"; but the sign that his lips are touched with a burning coal.
And this was done so that he would not doubt the word he heard. Thus the
signs are rightly used, and serve to confirm faith. And it cannot be
said otherwise than that Isaiah truly received forgiveness of sins
through the word and the sign at the same time. Therefore one must keep
this saying, that also the outward signs are used with the word for the
forgiveness of sins. Now follows the third part of this chapter.

V. 8. **And I heard the voice of the Lord saying.**

\(10\) This is the effect, power, and sum of this vision, that a part of
the people is hardened and cast away, and a part is accepted and
enlightened. As if he wanted to say: I teach a different righteousness
than you have; but you do not want to suffer this, because nothing
clings to you more stubbornly than the opinion of your own
righteousness. Thus we see in the Gospel that all the words and deeds of
Christ were wonderful; but because he taught against the righteousness
of the Jews, they did not receive him, but blasphemed him.

**Who should I send?**

\(11\) He has indeed cause to ask. For because of the very great
difficulty that is in the ministry of the word, all are with trembling.

and unwillingness to do the same. Thus, Moses could be brought with
difficulty to take upon himself the teaching ministry, especially among
this people. Therefore, a great courage is required for the ministry of
the word, which can despise the ingratitude and wickedness of the world.
So nowadays our name is daily weighed down more and more with the hatred
and envy of men. They blame us for the murder of the peasants; the new
sects and godless opinions of many people, they say, have also arisen
because of us. What is needed here is a brave courage that will not let
itself be broken by this infinite wickedness of the world, and that will
continue steadily in its office; the others succumb and give way to
blasphemies.

**V. 9. 10. Hear it, and understand it not.**

\(12\) This passage has been interpreted in many ways, and many,
although it is not appropriate to the matter, talk about the election of
grace and similar works of the Majesty. But we want to keep the simple
opinion. As if to say, I teach now a very different righteousness from
that which ye have; and ye are indignant at it. But it will happen to
you that you will hear the preaching of this divine righteousness, and
yet will not hear it, 2c. that he thus punishes the unbelieving Jews for
righteousness and obstinacy at the same time. And it should not be that
we sharply dispute whether God really blinds people. For that is
hardening enough, when he withdraws his spirit and leaves the godless to
Satan.

**V. 11: Until the cities become desolate.**

This is a prophecy of the devastation of the Jewish empire by the
Romans. They will not desist, he says, until they are destroyed and
perish.

V. 12. \[Vulg.\] **Which was forsaken shall be increased.**

The survivors will be saved, and the believers will inhabit the
spiritual Jerusalem. It is a promise for the godly.

**64** L.xxii, 75-77. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 6, 13. w.vi,
\[s-ioi, **65**

**V. 13. But the tenth part is still to remain inside.**

\(15\) That is, the remnant shall be saved.

\[Vulg.\] **And it will spread like a terebinth tree.**

He says the same: The largest part of the people will perish, and from
the remaining a new people and a new church will grow. But with this he
indicates the power and effect of the gospel, that from a small lump,
from a barren grain, a tremendously great multitude will grow up.

**Secret interpretation.**

16 I have often reminded you that you should follow the historical view
everywhere and keep it, since this alone can strengthen the heart with a
certain testimony and maintain faith and fear. Secret interpretations
are not able to do this, but they are only a kind of ornamentation by
which the historical treatment gets some adornment. However, we would
like to add the secret interpretation to this passage, so that the
students may have an example of which kind of secret interpretation they
can follow most safely, if at all some want to show their understanding
in this piece.

17 Right at the beginning it says: the Lord sits over the temple. Here
Christ sits at the right hand of the Father in the true temple, namely
in the congregation of the saints. But he appears in a visible form,
because he became true man; for everywhere the visible form of God means
the humanity of Christ.

18\. next to him are the seraphim, that is, the apostles and preachers.

19\) And the wings signify the ministry of the word, which consists
wholly in the preaching of the law, or repentance, and of the gospel, or
grace.

20\. flying means the course of the gospel.

21\. but their number is uncertain, because the Lord gives the gospel
with great multitudes, Ps. 68:12. but though they are many, they are
many.

they all preach Christ unanimously.

They cover their faces and their feet. This means that the life of the
Christian is hidden in Christ. The head is faith; but the feet are the
outward walk, which cannot be grasped with the hands. For the hypocrites
also do works, but they do not want to have them covered or concealed,
but they are to be seen by everyone, so that they may have glory and
honor among men. But the life of the godly is 1) without glory among
men; as they said of Christ \[Luc. 11:15\] that he casts out devils by
the chief of the devils.

The seraphim also stand, that is, they are always ready to preach, and
call out to one another: Holy, holy, holy. Similar sayings are also
these, Joh. 3, 13: \"No one goes to heaven but he who has come down from
heaven.\" 2) Likewise Rom. 3:20: \"By the works of the law shall no
flesh be justified.\" V. 10. ff.: There is none wise, there is none
understanding; they have all sinned 2c. This is the cry of those who
punish the world for sin. Consequently, those who boast for saints do
not cry: Holy is God, but: Holy are we 2c.

\(24\) The song sung at mass is only a song for boys, but a good
preacher is the right and public singer of it. Thus, since Peter in Acts
Cap. 2, 14. ff. this song was sung, it went through the heart of the
listeners, and they said: What shall we do? If Christ is preached
correctly, the fruit will surely follow, just as the thresholds of the
temple tremble at the shouting of the seraphim, that is, even the house,
and those who are of the church are moved and struck by the word when
they hear that Christ alone is righteous, but that they are sinners.

1\) Here is a gap in the Erlangen edition. After the words: \"For the
hypocrites also do works\" the same continues: turn 68t vita soruin
etiarn sins slvrin etc. The Wittenberg and Jena editions have our
reading.

2\) The words: in enklurn and eoelo are missing in the Wittenberg and
Erlangen; in the Jena they are placed according to the Vulgate.

[66 L. XXII, 77-79. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, I0I-I04.
67]{.underline}

\(25\) Then the house is also filled with smoke. By smoke is understood
that faith which believes the preaching of the word that all our works
are defiled. And this is truly a smoking faith, in which Christ rises,
and reason is killed, and the light of reason becomes smoke. For this is
the power of the word, that hearts are terrified thereby. Thus Nicodemus
was terrified by one smoke over another in many ways, until the light
came, \"So God loved the world. \"2c. \[John 3:16

26 Finally follows this voice: \"I am of unclean lips,\" by which we all
confess that we are unclean. And this confession brings forth the smoke,
that is, that sensation of the word that we feel we are damned.

Only then comes one of the seraphim, that is, a preacher of the gospel,
who proclaims to us forgiveness of sins through Christ.

28\. and touch our lips with a burning coal, that is, with the gospel,
which is a burning word, ignited by the Holy Spirit, in which
forgiveness of sins is offered to those who are killed by the shouting
of the seraphim. Then the mouth is touched when the heart is moved by
the Word. By this faith we are sent to all good works, and we rejoice to
break forth and preach to others. But we are condemned by the world as
heretics, yet we are not abandoned, but have the firm hope that some
little rice will still remain, which is the holy seed 2c.

**The seventh chapter.**

Here Isaiah begins a new prophecy with which he comforts the unbelieving
king Ahaz, who was in the greatest danger because the two very powerful
kings of Syria and Israel were fighting him. The story is written in 2
Kings 16:6 ff.

\(2\) Furthermore, this king Ahaz was, according to appearances, almost
the holiest of all the kings who had been in Judah, and showed a very
great zeal for religion. This is an excellent example of all hypocrites
who, while denying the word and the faith, rely on works, and call that
God, God\'s word and God\'s work, which is neither God nor God\'s word
nor God\'s work; but they only follow the appearance, but the truth they
do not grasp, for they zeal, but with ignorance.

3\. for God condemns all religion and all works, however good they may
appear to be, which are done without the word and with the opinion that
they will bring righteousness or merit. For he wants people to believe
in him, and he wants to

not the trust that is placed in our actions, which is the idol of our
heart. Thus Ahaz thought he was serving the true God with the various
works he performed, but God rejects them because Ahaz did them without
divine command, out of his own trust. For where the word is not, there
is not God. It is in vain, therefore, to assume that such works are
pleasing to God; indeed, they are a blasphemous service. But the main
thing is that we believe that these words are spoken to us by the divine
majesty, so that we may have comfort in dangers. When the heart believes
this, it cannot but be joyful and secure because of danger, however
great it may be.

**V. 2. The Syrians rely on Ephraim.**

4 That is, the king of Syria puts his trust in the king of Israel, they
unite their warring nations to oppress the king of Judah. For the
kingdom of Israel was called Ephraim.

**68** i4. xxii, 79-82. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 7, 2-6. W.
vi, uu-iv8. **69**

**Then his heart prayed. ^q^)**

\(5\) This is an excellent likeness of Ahaz the king and his people.
Because there was no faith among them, they trembled in this way. But
one must diligently observe the persons, that Ahaz, the excellent
worshipper of God, likewise the people, who were stimulated by the
example of their king, who had made it sour for himself with very many
works, sank to the ground as it were with fear, and against the imminent
danger of the war could not raise themselves up by trusting in their
worship.

\(6\) Thus there is no greater fear and despair than in the hypocrites
when they are challenged. Just as there is no greater certainty and
presumption than when everything goes according to their wishes; then
they subject themselves to all things, even to dispute against God.
Therefore, one can draw the conclusion from these words: The holier one
is, the more arrogant he is in happiness, and the more fainthearted in
danger. For just as trees everywhere are exposed to the wind, so also a
heart empty of words is exposed to all the attacks of Satan and to all
misfortune, and so exposed that it cannot endure any misfortune. For
since the Word is not there, by which alone hearts can be established,
there remain only works, which have no power in danger, and are indeed a
fragile support and a powerless God. Therefore it is vain to trust in
works, as is evident from this example of Ahaz; in good days they only
puff up and make safe, but in dangers they cause terror and dismay.

The righteous, on the other hand, have the word in their hearts, which
they hold against all the storms of Satan, and are not brought to
despair by any wind. They do good works themselves, but they do not put
their trust in them, but only in the word. That is why they feel in
their hearts what the 112th Psalm, v. 7, 8, says:

q\) Instead of §§ 5-7, the following is found in the 1532 edition: You
see an excellent example of how the works saints and hypocrites cannot
stand in temptations and misfortunes. For Ahaz was a very great saint of
works, as the histories show.

\"When a plague is about to come, he does not fear; his heart is
undaunted, he hopes in the Lord, his heart is confident and does not
fear. We have already seen it in part, and will see it more often in the
heretics, what will be the end of those who now so surely despise and
attack us.

**V. 3. You and your son Sear Jasub (**et qui derelictus est^1^ )
Jasub**).**

8\) If this name \"Sear Jasub\" is taken as a proper name, it has a
special meaning; just as almost all great people have had such names,
which meant something special. Thus Solomon had his name from peace,
David from love. Thus he implies that this son of his bears the name of
all the people who are left, not only from the battle, but also from
wickedness. For there are always remnants of the godly, for whose sake
even the godless are preserved. But if you take it as a generic name,
the opinion will be this: I would gladly grant you more companions, but
they are all unbelievers; you with your son are alone alive and
remaining; take him with you 2c.

**V. 4. Do not be afraid.**

\(9\) Here you can see how different the feelings in temptation are in a
heart that believes the promises of God and in a heart that relies on
its works.

**Let your heart be undaunted before these two smoking fires.**

\(10\) This is a strange diminution. For the enemies of Judah did not
seem to be extinguishing fires, but burning furnaces and immense
conflagrations; and yet faith says: they are burned-out extinguishing
fires, which no longer burn, but only smoke, and will soon be reduced to
ashes.

**V. 5. 6. We will go up to Judah.**

11 In order for Ahaz to believe the divine promise, the pro-

1\) In the Jena and Erlangen: a 4usud. But in the Vulgate and in the
Wittenberg the u is missing.

70 L- xxii, 82-84. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, ms-iii. 71

phet even the attacks of the enemies, which is the greatest sign that
God will not abandon Ahaz.

**The son of Tabeal.**

12 Here the word \"son\" can be taken in the same sense as above \[Cap.
5, § 4\] the expression filium olei, that filius Tabeal means as much as
someone who looks at us and pleases us, although he is not of royal
lineage.

V. 7. **It shall not stand, nor so go.**

13 The prophet multiplies the promise and explains why he called them
extinguishing fires, namely, because they threatened with fire and
devastation of the kingdom, although they would not accomplish anything.
It will not come to pass that they will join your kingdom with their
kingdoms, as they now have in mind.

V. 8. 9. **As Damascus is the head in Syria.**

14 That is, Rezin shall be king only in Syria at Damascus; but that he
promises himself to obtain the victory over thy kingdom, that is void.

**If you do not believe, you will not remain.**

\(15\) This is an excellent saying, which is to be applied to all
temptations in general, namely, that all our efforts and endeavors will
deceive us in temptation. But faith alone in the word of promise makes
us to abide, and that which we do to stand firm. For this is how it
reads according to the Hebrew. So he exhorts Ahaz, as if to say, \"I
promise you by word that these two kings will not hurt you. Believe this
word. If you do not, everything you do after this will fail, because all
trust is vain that is not based on the word of God.

**And over five and sixty years.**

016 This is a great promise: not thou, but thine enemies shall perish.
For the Assyrians have laid waste Samaria and Syria.

V. 10-12. **Ask for a sign from the Lord.**

17\) The unbelieving Ahaz throws the greatest promises to the wind and
despises them; so that God may move him to believe, he also adds a sign.
But also in this way he does not achieve anything. He rejected the first
promise because of the present circumstances, because he saw that two
kings, whom he was not a match for, had prepared themselves against him;
therefore he turned away the power of the two kings. Now, against the
sign attached to the promise, he cites the Scriptures. Here the prophet
is defeated on both sides: with the deed, because he cannot present the
future victory as present; and with the word, which the godless king
falsifies. This is the way of the wicked: the longer they are taught,
the less they increase. But notice this passage about the usefulness of
the signs, that they are not merely outward signs, but confirm the
faith, and make the conscience sure of the good and gracious will of
God, so that we do not doubt the promise which the word offers.

**That I do not tempt the Lord.**

This is an excellent passage about the saints of works. The godless Ahaz
pretends to great holiness, that he does not want to demand a sign out
of fear of God. Thus, where it is not necessary, hypocrites are
exceedingly conscientious; again, where they should be humble, they are
exceedingly hopeful. But where God commands to be bold, one must also be
bold. For to be obedient to the word is not to tempt God. Rather, it is
tempting God when one does something without the word, just as a monk
tempts God when he goes to the monastery to serve God there, while he
has no word of God by which God testified that he would be served by
such a way of life. Thus, today the sacramentarians, for the sake of
reverence for God, deny that the body and blood of Christ are in the
bread and wine. But this does not mean not to have awe and reverence
before God, if one believes this, yes, even to give life to what God
says.

**72** L. XXII, 84-86. short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 7, 13-25. W.
VI, III-IIS. **73**

V. 13, 14: Therefore the Lord Himself will give you a sign.

19 The prophet is displeased with the unbelief of Ahaz and others, as if
to say, \"You could now confirm your faith by a sign which God has
promised you, so that you may be assured of your welfare; but because
you do not want this, behold, God the Lord will give you a sign which
you will find offensive. Christ shall be born of a virgin, and shall be
a healing sign unto others: but unto the house of David he shall be a
grievance and a fall.

Behold, a virgin shall conceive.

20 The Hebrew word Alma means a virgin who is already able to marry a
man and to give birth. Although the Jews make fun of this passage in
many ways, because the prophet says that it should be a sign, this
conception and birth must necessarily not take place in a common and
natural way. For it is no wonder, if such a one, who heals a virgin,
gives birth after nine months.

V. 15. Butter and honey he will eat.

That is, he will be brought up like other boys. For it is nothing but a
description that Christ is true man. He added this to cover the
prophecy. Furthermore, the name \"Immanuel\" belongs to the description
of the person, how Christ will be in his person, and not according to
the name. For this is a childish blasphemy of the Jews, that they say,
Christ was not called Immanuel, but JEsus, consequently he is not the
true Messiah. The Jews understand this also of Hezekiah. But as the
blinded people want to help their error, they themselves show their
laziness and ignorance. Because Hezekiah was born almost nenn years
before this prophecy.

V. 17 But the Lord will bring days upon you.

22\. Hereby he announces the destruction by the Babylonians. But he
writes it to the

Assyrians, because at that time the monarchy of the Chaldeans (which
originated from the Assyrians) was not yet present. However, he
describes a general devastation.

V. 18. 19. For at that time the Lord will swish the fly.

23 He predicts the punishments in general. But this misfortune, which he
announces here before, happened to them by and by fully to the
Egyptians. But these words are connected with the previous ones in the
following way. He says: God will surely give you this sign; but before
he will give it to you, you will be miserably afflicted, soon by this
enemy, soon by that enemy, because of your unbelief.

V. 20. At that time the Lord will shave off the head and the hair of the
feet.

24 That is, the princes will be taken away, the kingdom devastated, the
people exhausted. For the hairs of the head are the princes. The hair on
the feet is the common people. The beard is the priesthood. But he calls
the king of Assyria a hired clipper, because God will use him for a time
to punish his people.

V. 21-25: At the same time a man shall draw a herd of cows and two
flocks.

This whole passage is nothing else but a description of the future
loneliness. He wants to say: There will be few who will cultivate the
field.

Cap. 8, 1-3. Take before you a great letter.

26 This is the other sign, which has two pieces, the letter and the son,
which presented the person of the king of Assyria. But the opinion of
this sign is the same as that of the previous prophecy,^r^ ) namely,
that the kings of Syria and Israel, who seemed as if they would lay
waste the kingdom of Judah, should be laid waste by the king of Assyria.

r\) From here to the end of the paragraph, the 1532 edition has: So
before Christ comes, you will be punished because of your unbelief.
Israel will perish and Judah will also be afflicted.

74L . xxn, 87-8\". Interpretations about the prophets. W. vi, ns-ns. 75

V. 4. **for before the boy can call out.**

He explains the sign and clearly indicates what he is threatening with
it.

V. 5-8. **Because this people despises the water of Siloam.**

28 This is on Judah. Because they could not be awakened to faith by word
or sign, he threatens them that they will provoke God by their unbelief,
so that he will send a foreign enemy against them, who will devastate
the land far worse than they now think of the king of Syria and Israel.
Accordingly, this passage is to be understood of Sanherib, the king of
Assyria.

29 But it seems as if this is in conflict with the preceding. For here
he calls the Assyrians confederates of the kingdom of Judah, which he
had called its enemies above \[Cap. 7, 1\]. But it is easy to answer
this. For this people, who lacked faith, sought all external help in
their distress. When they had something to hope for from their enemies,
they joined forces with them, forsook God, and put their trust in

God away. Therefore he threatens here that no help will be of any use to
them, but they will be lost together with their help.

30 He calls the small people of Jerusalem Siloah, who fight with prayer
and not with weapons. But he adds an epithet, and calls them still
waters, to indicate the contrast, that the world in its carnal help goes
along with noise and splendor. In contrast, the people of God are
despised and weak in outward appearance, but glorious and powerful in
spirit.

**Up to the neck.**

31\. for Jerusalem, which was the head, was not taken by Sanherib; as he
will teach hereafter \[Cap. 37, 10.\], and as we read 2 Kings 19, 1) 36.

**Water of the stream.**

32 Thus he calls the Euphrates, beyond which lay Assyria.

1\) Erlanger: 4 kex. 20. Wittenberger and Jenaer: 4 1\^68- 26.

**The eighth chapter.**

V. 9. 10. \[Vulg.\] **Gather yourselves together, you nations.**

Here we can most easily begin the eighth chapter. But this also belongs
to the previous chapter. For at the end of the seventh chapter he had
said about the flooding up to the neck. But it was the intention of the
king of Assyria not only to flood up to the neck, but to destroy the
whole kingdom of Judah. Accordingly, here the prophet comforts the
godly, and mocks the arrogance and haughtiness of the Assyrians, who
came dressed with such great presumption. \"Gather yourselves
together,\" he says, \"ye nations, and yet give flight.\" ^s^) But this
scolding serves the

s\) Instead of the following sentence, the 1532 edition has: \"Thus he
chides the enemies and bids them evil, lest the pious despair.\"

Enemies for the uplifting of the pious, so that they do not despair in
the present danger. For the whole chapter is arranged for the comfort
and instruction of the godly. But we too, at this time, when we are
terrified by many a war cry and attacked by innumerable plots of the
enemies of the gospel, should comfort ourselves with such rich promises
that the plots of the wicked will be destroyed, and nothing will come of
what they say 2c.

**\[For God is with us**.

This is the reason why he does not want the godly to despair of the
victory against king Sanherib. And this passage shows us who will be the
warriors who will win the victory, namely the quiet ones

7ß L. xxu, 89-9i. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 8, 10-16. w. vi.
119-122. 77

not those who are presumptuous of their strength, like the Assyrians.
But the weapons by which they have the upper hand are faith in the
promise and fervent prayer. When we have overcome Satan with these
weapons, it will be easy to defeat the Turk as well. In this way, we
have overcome many cruel attempts that Satan has made against us through
prayer, and have escaped them.

**V.11. Then he took me by the hand and instructed me.**

Now he warns the godly against the trouble of weakness, saying:
\"Although your strength is nothing, and you cannot resist such a strong
enemy, beware that you do not put your trust in human help and
covenants, as the godless are wont to do. Your trust should be in God,
otherwise you will perish.

V. 12. 13. **You shall not say, Covenant.**

4\. this is imitation way (μιμητιχως*)* to

understand. As if he wanted to say: You have focused your thoughts on
nothing but covenants; and in dealing with them, you despise God and do
not remember Him. The Scriptures in many places reject covenants because
they give rise to presumption on human powers, whereas one should rather
rely on God. But there are also other worldly (politicae) causes for
which the covenants are rightly rejected. For, as the Duke of Saxony,
Frederick, of blessed memory, who has never been praised enough, said:
\"The alliances bring with them this disaster, that they often provoke
the parties to start wars by relying on their allies, which they would
not otherwise start if they were alone and not in alliances with others.
After that, it generally happens that when one starts something in the
hope of help from others, one is finally abandoned by the confederates
when danger is imminent. This led the very wise prince to renounce all
alliances.

**\[Do not fear as he does.**

\(5\) \"As he does,\" namely, King Ahaz and his councilors, who put the
people in fear by increasing the danger and seeking outside help. Fear
not the power of the enemy, as they did; trust in me, fear me, and ye
shall be saved.

**V. 14. Thus he will be a sanctification.**

That is, only then will you be holy when you believe God and fear Him;
then you will be safe from all danger, as it says \[Ex. 23:22\]: \"I
will be the enemy of your enemies. Likewise \[Ps. 105, 15.\]: \"Do not
touch my anointed ones\" 2c.

**A stone of offence.**

But they that believe not, and take refuge in human help, shall fall and
perish. This saying is also found in Rom. 9, 33. and 1 Petr. 2, 7. f. in
a slightly different form. For the apostles used this general saying for
a specific matter. But it is a general saying: \"As soon as one has
departed from the faith, then we are offended by all the works and words
of God and perish. Just as now the heretics take offense at all things,
because they have once fallen away from simplicity.

**V. 16. Bind up the testimony.**

\(8\) I take all these words in general, that they apply to all times
and to all ungodly men. Therefore, they are also quite rightly addressed
in the epistle to the Hebrews \[Cap. 2, 13\]. Because the godless Jews
do not want to believe, they consequently do not understand the law and
the word of God. For without faith the law cannot be understood.
Therefore he says: \"Bind up the testimony\", that is, take away your
word from them, and keep it for me and my children, that is, the
believers. Thus Christ says in the Gospel: \"It is given to you to know
the secret of the kingdom of heaven, but it is not given to these,\"
Matth. 13, 11. and in the letters to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 3, 14.:
\"Until this day the same cover remains uncovered over the Old
Testament, when they read it\" 2c.

78 L. XXII, 91-94. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, I22-1W. 79

**V. 17: For I hope in the Lord.**

9 Here the unbelievers bump into each other. He wants us to wait for
help and power, but not to grasp it with our hands or to see it. On the
other hand, the wicked do not want to believe in help, but to feel it.
Therefore they despise the doctrine of faith and seek the arm of the
flesh. Thus in these two words, \"I hope in the Lord,\" is contained the
summa of the whole Christian doctrine, which is not in feeling but in
hoping. Hence the author of the epistle to the Hebrews \[Cap. 2, 13.\]
has rightly adduced them: \"I will put my trust in him,\" that is, I
will not walk according to Mosaic righteousness.

**V.18. The children whom the Lord has given me for signs and wonders in
Israel.**

10 This teaching of faith that I lecture is not invalid. For I have
disciples. These are children before God, that is. Innocent, and the
most pleasant race among men; but before the race they are monsters,
wonders, and an abomination, before whom the whole world hath
abhorrence. Thus Christ says Ps. 22:7, \"I am a worm, and not a man.\"
And Paul says in 1 Cor. 4:13 that he and all Christians are a curse and
a sacrifice in this world.

**V. 19. You must ask the soothsayers.**

To the doctrine of faith he now adds a warning like that of Christ and
the apostles: \"Beware of false prophets\" \[Matth. 7, 15\]. For here he
imitates the words of the false prophets. But he calls \"soothsayers\"
those who are in the teaching office, as Annas, Caiphas 2c.

**Or should we ask the dead for the living?**

12\. so one must translate instead of: Provivis ac mortuis \[in the
Vulgate\]. But he calls dead those who cannot teach. As if he wanted to
say: You, my children, will be challenged by the false brothers to go
over to their unbelief; but beware and answer them: Rather believe the
living than the dead. Say: You are dead teachers.

rer. Therefore, we want to hear God\'s voice and word that makes alive,
not you dead teachers and your doctrine that kills souls 2c. So we say
today: We want to hear Christ, not the Roman pope. 2c.

**V. 20-22. Yes, according to the law and testimony.**

Some make an oath out of this, but we want to stay with the simple
understanding that it is, as it were, an interjection. You will say that
one must expect and ask for help from God, but how will we get to Him?
How are we going to do it? Now, lest they think that God will answer
them by inspiration (speculationes) and send a new word, he refers them
to the written law and testimony, that is, to oral preaching, lest they
become too spiritual, like our heretics today, who cry out: Spirit,
Spirit. Not so, says the prophet, but \"according to the law and
testimony\". That is, if you do not follow the word of God, you will
perish, and the light, that is, the word of the Gospel, will be taken
away from you, by which the hearts will be enlightened, pacified, and
made serene. Thus **he** calls us back to the Word, so that we should
not expect any special revelations. Thus says Christ \[John 5:39\],
\"Search the Scriptures.\" Thus saith Paul \[2 Tim. 3:16\], \"The
Scriptures are profitable for doctrine.\" So says Peter \[2 Ep. 1,
19.\], \"We have the prophetic word,\" to this we are to pay attention.
It is the word that changes and moves hearts, but the revelations blow
up and make presumptuous people.

\(14\) I have not been taught by signs or special revelations, nor have
I ever asked God for signs; rather, I have asked for the opposite, so
that I would not be lifted up, nor be drawn away from the oral word by
Satan\'s deceit. For there is no danger in the word, but it is powerful,
and changes the hearts that are not wicked. But the spirits of the
wicked are wicked, who read all things not as disciples, but as masters,
that they may confirm their error.

\(15\) Therefore, this passage of the prophet is to be diligently
remembered against the mob and the swarm.

**80** xxn. 94-W. Brief exposition on Isaiah, cap. 8, 20-22. 9, I. 2. W.
vi, 12S-129. **81**

spirits that prophesy from their heads. \"According to the law\", says
the prophet, that is, according to the law one must rather ask. For God
speaks to you through the Scriptures, and through men who teach the
Scriptures; he who hears them is not deceived. But special revelations
of faith must be fled, for they are Satan\'s deception.

16 Now although this is a general threat, it is understood primarily by
the Jews of Christ\'s day, who have lost both the light of the Word and
the peace of heart, and, being blinded, are angry with our Lord Christ
their King. \"They are hungry,\" that is, they, as hardened ones, are
tormented by eager desire for the Messiah, and become more longing,
eager, and hardened day by day. \"They shall gape upon themselves.\"
They have cried out, he says, and I have not heard. Even on the earth
they see nothing but loud tribulations. These are terrifying threats
against those who forsake the word of faith, which are to remind us that
we may humble ourselves and be willing to be instructed by the word of
God, against the papists\' slander, who cry out, \"Church, church! But
we cry out, \"Law and testimony!\" and put the church, which has
accepted the gospel, under these. For it does not follow that the church
has the power to accept the gospel, therefore it also has the power to
change the gospel as it pleases, as they impudently assert.

You will not have the dawn.

17 He calls the doctrine of the gospel, which enlightens the heart,
enlightens the mind, and enlightens the soul.

comforts and consoles. Thus Peter calls it \[2. Ep. 1, 19.\]: \"the
morning star that rises in the hearts\". The following images are known,
that he calls fear and tribulation darkness and gloom in the same way.

Cap. 9, 1. At the previous time, when it was easy.

18 He makes these tribulations greater by comparing them with the
previous tribulations. As if to say: The unbelieving Jews will be
afflicted much more severely than they have been afflicted so far:
First, since the land of Zebulun and Naphtali was made small by
Tiglathpilesser the Assyrian, who carried away a good part of Israel;
then, since the ten tribes were carried away by Salmanasser, along with
a good part of Judah, 2 Kings 17:3 ff. Matthew has taken this passage
Cap. 4, 15 from the Septuagint. He has not changed anything, except that
he has taken the saying, which here refers to something special, in a
general way, and draws this light, of which it is said here, to the
presence of Christ in Capernaum. For where Christ is, be it where it
will, there is light. But such interpretations and citations \[of
scriptural passages\] are not for argument, but for exhortation, like
Paul\'s word in the epistle to the Galatians \[Cap. 4, 29. ff.\] of
Ishmael and Isaac. Many things of this kind were put on by the apostles,
not for the sake of argument, but to make the matter larger and more
graceful. For not only did those who are in Naphtali walk in darkness,
but it is easily drawn to them.

**The ninth chapter.**

Here he inserts a prophecy of the future kingdom of Christ, of the
unbelief of the Jews, and of the church that should be gathered from the
Gentiles.

V. 2: The people who walk in darkness.

2\. with one word he abolishes all the righteousness, wisdom and power
of the world, and

makes them ashamed. For if he calls the land of the Jews darkness, the
Gentiles are much more darkness. Furthermore, this was the merit of both
the Jews and the Gentiles, because of which they saw this light of the
gospel and the kingdom of grace, that they walked in darkness. So
nowadays our merits, by which we have seen this

82 D- xxn, S6-S9. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 129-132. 83

The light of the gospel, the infinite abominations of the pabstics in
which I have lived. So there are no merits that precede, but everything
is offered by divine grace.

**V. 3. You make many things for the Gentiles, but you do not make many
pleasures.**

The Gentiles accept the gospel, and so the church is increased by the
coming of the Gentiles. But the Jews begrudge the Gentiles this
happiness; as it is said in Deut. 32:21: \"In a foolish people will I
provoke them to anger.\" Likewise, \"I will provoke them against that
which is not a people.\" And this is what he says: \"With this you do
not make much of joys.\"

**V. 4 For you have broken the yoke of their burden, and the rod of
their shoulder, and the staff of their driver.**

4 Just as Gideon (Judges 7:22) defeated a great army of Midianites with
three hundred men of war. The Gentiles have been delivered from their
enemies through Christ. Therefore they rejoice and are glad. ^t^)

5\. Furthermore, the enemies, these three most powerful tyrants of the
whole world, were the law, sin and death. For the law is the power of
sin; but sin is the sting of death. For death could not bite us if it
were not for sin.

\(6\) Now sin is twofold. One sin is called the recognized sin, which
judges and condemns the world and reason. These are the civil and
outward sins of the other table. Although men see these, they do not see
the cause of them, but they think that these works are done by the
instigation of the corrupt

t\) Here, instead of what was said in §§ 5-9 in the edition of 1532: For
we suffer the tyranny of the law, of sin and of death. But the office of
the law is \"the rod of the driver.\" \"The rod of the shoulder\" is
sin. \"The yoke of the burden\" is death. From these three we are all
delivered who believe in Christ; not that the law, sin, or death is
taken away or changed, but that we are changed and become different
people. For to whom Christ has given his Spirit, they do the law from
the heart and with pleasure, and believe the forgiveness of sins. So now
the law, sin and death necessarily depart and are subject to them.

Will. The other sin is the one that is called unrecognized sin, namely
the original sin or original sin, which is not seen unless it is shown
by the law. This happens in temptations, when the conscience is shocked
and sees the ungodliness inherent in the heart, namely the contempt and
hatred of God and the neighbor, so that even though you are not a thief,
adulterer, death-slayer, you are nevertheless afraid of the judgment of
God, because you see that ungodliness has penetrated the whole body like
a poison.

This is actually the power of the law, which he here calls the
\"driver\", because it presses and drives the conscience with the \"rod
of the shoulder\", that is, with sin, which it shows, and with the
\"yoke of the burden\", that is, with eternal death, which is the wages
of sin. Accordingly, the prophet says that the joy of the Gentiles is
that the Gentiles are delivered from these tyrants by such a victory as
Gideon obtained over the Midianites.

\(8\) But the prophet attaches to the law a scepter, that is, a complete
rule. Likewise, a scepter of the driver. For the law requires us to
fulfill the law, and rules over us, because there is no one to do the
law, but we all, because of inherent sin, hate the word and works of
God, even God Himself, when He chastises us; just as children, when they
are chastised, hate their parents. So we are all enemies of the law, and
wish that the law were not. But the law cannot be abolished, which is
followed by the other tyrant of which we have spoken before, namely,
sin. For, because I hate my parents, because I hate GOD and the Law of
GOD, therefore I sin. So these two tyrants tyrannically drive us to
where we neither want nor can go, namely, to death. With such great
tyranny, however, pleasure cannot take place; and because one is always
threatened with death, the mind cannot long endure this, but it is
necessary that man become a different and new creature, or succumb to
the burden. For the devil cannot bear the force of the divine judgment.

84 n. XXII, 99-wi. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. U, 4-6. W. vi,
13-2-in. 85

9 Hence the prophet says \[v. 3\], \"They will rejoice before you,\"
because the gospel announces to us the forgiveness of sins and the
victory over the law and death, which was obtained through Christ, and
which the prophet compares to the victory of Gideon. For Christ gives
his Spirit that we may not despair in sins, and may boast in
tribulations that the office of the law is done, and that the law, which
hitherto has been hateful and a cruel driver, becomes lovely. Not that
the law is changed, but that we are changed by the Spirit of God, which
makes us love the Father who chastens. For the rod was not changed, but
the mind of the child. And this is the Christian freedom, according to
which we are freed from the scepter of the driver, and according to
which the Holy Spirit is given that we can do the law to some extent,
but if we do not satisfy it, that it does not make us guilty because we
have forgiveness of sins. With the law, however, death is also overcome
and ceases at the same time. Thus the hearts are gladdened and freed
from the fear of the tyrants they had to endure before they knew Christ.

10 But this is done in the same way that Gideon overcame the Midianites,
that is, the enemies wear themselves out. The trumpet is blown, that is
the voice of the gospel. And the pitchers are broken, which is the
suffering of Christ. Therefore, the Word and the Spirit in the Word,
then Christ\'s suffering, bring us this great victory without any effort
on our part. For since the law, sin, and death have attacked Christ, in
whom we believe, as a culprit,^u^ ) they kill themselves by killing
Christ, and have been crushed in the body of Christ, so that they do no
further harm to those who believe in this suffering of Christ.

u\) Here the edition of 1532 continues up to the end of the s): so
Christ overcame them in his body and gave this victory to those who
needed it. Therefore, sin, death and the law were destroyed in Christ\'s
body; and because they attacked him as an innocent, they can no longer
harm those who believe.

can. This suffering merit Christ gives through the word to all believers
for free, that through this his suffering they have forgiveness of sins
without any merit they have 2c. This is the glorious victory that the
prophet praises here, that one sees that death fei killed by itself,
without our work.

**V. 5. for all warfare with impetuosity.**

11\. there will be peace and love among Christians.

**V. 6. For unto us a child is born.**

\(12\) This also belongs to the description of this kingdom, that he
says a child is born, that he may indicate a kingdom of peace and a
spiritual kingdom. As if to say, \"To us who are in darkness, who are
under sin, and under physical and spiritual tyrannies, a child has been
born; not a king who wields weapons, but a peaceable one who brings us
into his kingdom of peace.

**Which dominion (**principatus**) is on his shultet,^x^ )**

This is a wonderful speech. Some take the principatum for the cross by
which he overcame the world. But this opinion seems to be a bit too
far-fetched. Others take principatum for \"rule,\" that the opinion is
that the rod is placed on the shoulders of the poorer, but on this
child\'s shoulders, instead of the rod, the principatum or freedom is
placed, that it is, as it were, a contrast to the preceding. And I do
not dislike this opinion, for it refers to faith. However, it seems to
me that it can be explained quite simply that we, who are his
principality, are carried on his shoulder, the other way round, as it is
wont to happen in the kingdoms of the world. For in the world the
subjects carry and suffer their kings,

x\) Instead of z 13, the following is found in the 1532 edition: We, who
are his principality, are carried on his shoulders. He is our servant,
that we may be free and kings. He is the cornerstone that carries and
holds all the other stones. But he wants us, as the other stones, to
carry one another, according to his example, as Paul says Gal. 6, 2:
\"One carries the other\" 2c.

86 L. XXII, IOI-104. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 135-138. 87

The kingdom of Christ, however, is of a completely different nature. The
kingdom of Christ, however, has a completely different meaning. For
Christ is not carried by his principality and by his subjects, but he
himself carries his principality, that is, he is our servant, so that we
may be free and kings. Thus he still carries us today. But just as he
carries us, so he again wants his stones to carry one another; but that
all our carrying, with which we, according to the example of Christ,
carry others, may be carried by the cornerstone Christ himself. This
opinion pleases me more, because it holds the figure of the kingdom of
Christ, how it is constituted, both in itself and in the members.

**Wonderful.**

14 Now he adds the names of Christ that describe his kingdom. \"His name
is Wonderful.\" For his kingdom is above all experience, because it is
not felt, but believed. For what can be called more wonderful than that
we lean on an alien righteousness, and despair of our righteousness, or
of our works?

**Rath.**

By his word he counsels us in all danger.

**Force.**

\(16\) Who with his word supports those who are weakened by temptations.
He counsels his own with such a word, which is emphatic and powerful.
But these two names are to be distinguished in such a way that El means
the independent power with which he sustains others, but Gibbor, or a
hero, means the active or working power by virtue of which he resists
the enemies, drives them into flight and destroys them.

**Hero.**

17\. who defends us, and is mighty against the adversaries. Furthermore,
it must be noted that the first name must be applied to all the others.
For as he is a marvelous counselor and marvelously powerful, so he is
also a marvelous hero, because the opposite is before his eyes. He is a
hero and lets himself be crucified and killed by Satan. He is a hero,

and lets his church be oppressed by the heretics. Therefore, everything
must be taken in faith.

**Eternal Father.**

\(18\) This name signifies not the person, but the work of the person,
that he is an everlasting Father, ever begetting, ever multiplying his
kingdom and his church, ever remaining a Father, not being a judge, nor
ever becoming a judge, but having in him a fatherly love without end.

**Prince of Peace.**

19\. who comforts the hearts, forgives the sin 2c. But you must notice
that if he is an eternal father, if he is a prince of peace, therefore
he cannot be a fleshly or worldly king; so he is also wonderful in peace
and eternity.

**V. 7. that his dominion might be great.**

The kingdom of Christ will always be increased, and yet nothing is less
than the increase of the kingdom of Christ, but rather its reduction and
subversion. Therefore the first name also belongs here, that he is
called a wonderful king. Thus Paul says in 2 Cor. 4:10: \"We always bear
in our bodies the death of the Lord Jesus\"; likewise \[1 Cor. 15:31\]:
\"By our glory which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.\"
This is not multiplying the kingdom; and yet in this way Christ
multiplies his kingdom; and Christians multiply by being slain, as the
Scripture speaks \[Gen. 4:10.\], \"The voice of thy brother\'s blood
crieth unto me.\" Thus I hold that John Hus brought to light the Gospel
we now have by his blood. Therefore, we must not be frightened or
despair when we hear of persecutions and suffer the same. For the church
is made fruitful and grows through the blood of the pious.

**In the chair of David.**

\(21\) This he has necessarily added to indicate the resurrection of the
dead and eternal life. For Christ\'s spiritual kingdom is on the throne
of David, that is, in this bodily life, and the-

88 **L. XXII, IV4-IV6.** Short Interpretation On Isaiah, Cap. 9, 7-17.
**W. VI, 138-141.** 89

nor is it^y^ ) an eternal kingdom. Therefore, this king must necessarily
be God and man. He must be man, because he sits on the throne of David;
God, however, because he reigns in eternity. The bodies of the believers
must also be resurrected after this life, otherwise his kingdom will not
be eternal. Thus the prophets darkly hint at the resurrection of the
dead, and the apostles emphatically inculcate that the resurrection has
been indicated in the Scriptures, which is seen in all such passages
about the kingdom of Christ. Therefore, those who are devoted to the
Scriptures should pay attention to them, and in this way practice them
diligently.

**That he finishes it.**

\(22\) That he strengthen it \[in the Vulgate: ut *confirmet* illud\]
should be translated, \"that he make it perfect. But it indicates that
Christ is now reigning in this world through faith, and is perfecting
us. But we will be perfect at the last day. He judges in judgment, that
is, by condemning and destroying the ungodly and preserving the godly.
Likewise, in righteousness, that is, because by mercy he raises up
righteousness, by which we shall be delivered from sin, death and hell
2c.

V. 8. 9. **The Lord has sent a word.**

> \(23\) Hitherto he prophesied of the kingdom of Christ; now he cometh
> to speak of the kingdom of Israel in the flesh. For the prophets use
> to connect these two kingdoms, the present physical and the future
> spiritual, just as in our sermons we mention both the present time and
> the future judgment, and teach of Christ that he now justifies the
> faithful by the word, and in the future judgment he will condemn the
> unfaithful. Here it must be noted that
>
> Israel Jacob
>
> the kingdom \< Ephraim \> are one and the same.

Joseph - Samaria

24\. \"The Lord has sent a word,\" that is, God is showering you with
His word, but you despise it out of pride.

y\) In the first edition: it will be.

**V. 10. Bricks have fallen.**

\(25\) You say, \"Bricks have fallen,\" that is, this damage we have
suffered at the hands of the king of Syria is small and will be easily
replaced, for we are God\'s people. Not so, says the prophet, for
heavier and harder things will follow. Thus he imitates the words of the
false prophets, with which they inflated the people. But everywhere the
arrogance of Israel is publicly denounced and condemned, which they had
drawn from the glorious promises. But God does not want people to be
puffed up and arrogant, for then they cannot be corrected; but He wants
to be feared, and for us to boast about God in this way, not that we
celebrate presumptuously, but that we humble ourselves. But Israel
boasted in such a way that they were presumptuous. But this is truly the
case of Lucifer from heaven, which cannot be corrected. If the pride of
the flesh is compared with this, it is only a game and a joke against
the spiritual pride, when one is presumptuous in the service of God, in
the divine office 2c.

V. 14-16. **Therefore the LORD will cut off from Israel both head and
tail.**

26 Because of your stubbornness, you will lose both the spiritual and
the physical kingdom. He calls the prophets the tail, as if to say: they
should be the head and lead the people, but they are the tail and let
themselves be led.

V.17. **Therefore the Lord cannot rejoice over their young team.**

27 That is, he will be angry and deliver them into the hand of the king
of Babylon.

**For they are all hypocrites.**

Both their works and their doctrine are evil. They are \"hypocrites\"
because they only follow their own and praise the same. They are
\"evil\" because they hate what is not theirs, namely the word and all
the works of God.

29\. for this is the characteristic of all hypocrites, that they are, as
Christ calls them, Matt. 23:33, viper-bred, that is, exceedingly

**90** L. XXII, Ivs-ios. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi,
141-145. **91**

arrogant, impatient, poisonous and harmful. Because they are convinced
that they are wise and just, they want to be thought of as such people,
or they persecute with extreme hatred those who have a different opinion
of them.

V. 18. For the ungodly being is kindled like fire.

\(30\) This is a description of the power of error. He says: \"Errors
are powerful and always get worse. Wickedness is the fire, the people
are the forest; therefore they are carried away to punishment by error.
This is an excellent image by which he describes the power of error;
just as Peter calls them 2 Ep. 2, 14, \"who do not let sin hinder
them,\" whose error no one can heal. It is not a fire where a thorn bush
burns, but the whole forest is set on fire for their sake: Because they
did not want the blessing, it stays away from them \[Ps. 109, 17\].

I am very much afraid that the same thing will happen to Germany. For we
see what damage the heretics have done to the church in these years, so
that there are very few who learn the holy scriptures purely and loudly,
and nothing else is valued but what nonsensical people write, speak and
do. That is, the ungodly being is set on fire so that it cannot be
extinguished. First, however, the fire seizes the thorns, that is, the
ungodly teachers, who like to spread ungodly opinions against the
simplicity of the word, therefore, as it were, the cancer creeps in
among the listeners.

The simile of thorns is very appropriate, since they prick very easily,
although there is hardly any other wood that has a smoother bark. This
is the hypocrisy, that they have the very best appearance, and agree
with our inclination that bread is bread, wine wine, water water 2c.
Thus the fire agrees with the tinder, hence an unquenchable fire
follows. Whatever we say or write against it is, as it were, a drop of
water against a burning forest.

33\. that he adds, \"And gives high

Smoke\" is to be taken to mean that a great and high smoke arises from
the fire of ungodliness, which spreads far and wide, as if it wanted to
cover the sky so that it could not be seen. This is what the ungodly are
wont to do: when they are taken up with ungodly doctrines, they praise
and extol glorious things about themselves, when it is nothing but an
empty appearance of works. It is not light or fire, but smoke. The Holy
Spirit has true fire; but the heretics are only smoke, without fire,
with which they hope against divine truth.

V. 19. For in the wrath of the LORD of hosts.

34\. Since they thus rage in their error, and become more and more
angry, God is compelled to punish them and call them back again. For
they are deceived by the arrogance of smoke, and become incorrigible.
Therefore, the preceding is to be taken from guilt, but this from
punishment. What the Latin translator has given by conturbata, for this
one should read obscurata \[\"darkened\"\]. For when the light is taken
away, what can remain but darkness and turmoil? For those cannot agree
among themselves who have departed from the Word, but they always bring
forth new errors. Thus the Arians are divided among themselves, some are
Macedonians, others Eunomians. Thus there have been three kinds of
Donatists. Therefore, he adds the following about the revolt.

No one spares another.

35\. Where the word is not, there follows rebellion; but to rebellion
follow covenants. This is what he indicates when he speaks:

V. 20. If they rob on the right, they suffer hunger.

That is, they may ally themselves with any party they want, but they
will fail. Because the alliances will be unreliable and unhappy.

Each one eats the flesh of his arm.

037 That is, there shall be wars and rebellion; one tribe shall rise
against another, the member against the body, Ephraim against Manasseh;
and afterward they shall join themselves together, and fight against
Judah.

**92** L. XXIII, 303. broader explanation of Isa. 9. w. VI, 145-152.
**9Z**.

**D. Martin Luther\'s Extensive Explanation of the Ninth Chapter of
Isaiah, \*)**

The book is a compilation of his lectures by M. Georg Rörer and
subsequently written in more detail by M. Johann Freder.

**Issued around Christmas 1543; printed 1546.**

Translated from Latin.

**Interpretation of the ninth chapter of Zesaiä.**

Brief Preface.

The day of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ is approaching, which must
be celebrated and praised with joy in the Church, as at all other times,
especially on the days which were dedicated to the memory of His most
holy and salvific birth by our ancestors, with the intention that the
memory of this supreme good deed, the ineffable mystery, and the
incomprehensible mercy and luminosity of God, according to which God
Himself may be renewed.

the Creator of heaven and earth, condescended to come down into our
flesh and become like us in everything, except sin. The greatness of
this inestimable and supreme benefit is infinite, and so great that the
human mind cannot fully comprehend its extent, at least on this earth.
And when godly hearts taste even a few drops of this inexhaustible
beneficence and infinite benevolence of God towards us, they are filled
and overflowed.

\*Apart from the short interpretation on the prophet Isaiah (sebobn in
Lsniam), Luther later gave more extensive? Erklärungen über einzelne
Stücke desselben, nämlich gegen Weihnachten 1543 (die Ausgaben bieten
1544), wo er seine Vorlesungen über die Genesis deshalb anderthalb
Monate lang unterbrach, über Jes. 9, 1---7. und in der Passions- und
Osterzeit 1544 über Jes. 53. (Köstlin, Martin Luther ,(3rd ed.(ß vol.
II, p. 599.) The former statement is not to be confused (as the Erlangen
edition did in its index, vol. 65, p. 55) with the sermon Luther
preached on the same text in 1526, which is found Walch, St. Louiser
Ausg, Bd. XI, 1972; just as little (which the editor of the German
Seckendorfische Historie des Lutherthums p. 2806 encountered) may the
shorter interpretation of the 53rd chapter, which is found in the
Wittenberg edition (1556) Bd. V, Bl. 286b, in the Altenburg Bd. VI, p.
357 and in Walch, Bd. VI, 984, be confused with the more extensive
explanation. Both interpretations, which Rörer had picked up from
Luther\'s mouth, appeared only after his death; the former together with
the interpretation of the second Psalm under the title: Lunrrutio ksalmi
seoundi n Uemsreudo D. Martmo Imtbero dietata et eoUsetu u Vito Dbeodoro
Xoriberg. üuarrntio Gap. uoui I\^suiae a D. lVIartiuo Outlmro dictata et
u dobnuim I\'redero ooUeotu. \'iVitvberMM per dobaunem ImM 1546. At
Rörer\'s request, Johann Freder from Pomerania took over the preparation
of Rörer\'s notes for printing, which we learn from the dedicatory
letter of b February 1546, in which he dedicated this book to Bishop
Nicolaus Amsdorf of Naumburg. This writing is then included in the Latin
Wittenberg edition (1552), tom. IV, tob 145b and into the Erlanger,
oxo\^. opp., tom. XXIII, p. 297. In German Uebersetzung it is found in
the Leipziger, vol. VII, p. 83 uno by Walch. The more extensive
explanation of the 53rd chapter was published by Stephan Tücher in 1550
under the title: I\^uarrutio 53rd (Wapitis üsuiue propbetao ex
praeiootiouibus Ueuoroudi patris O. \^Inistiui Imtberi summa üde et
diiiASutia eolleetu, Xuuo 1544 et uuuo (boe 1550 auuo) primum in lneern
aodita. Imprint \^InAdeburZi per Niebaelem bottborum. 1550. at the end:
MnAdeburZue ex otüeinu D\^poArapbma MiebneUs bottberi. This writing is
also found in the Latin Wittenberger (1552), tom. IV, koi. 145b and in
the Erlanger, exeZ. opp., tom. XXIII, p. 439; German in the Leipziger,
vol. VII, p. 369 and in Walch. In all editions except the Erlanger,
these more extensive explanations are appended to the respective
chapters of the short interpretation, and we have also retained this
arrangement, since it seems expedient to us.

94 n. xxm, 303-Ms. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 152-is4. 95

The same hearts with true and thorough joy. And the joy that devout
souls feel from this benefit is so great that it accompanies us into the
rest of our lives, and that we can never get enough of it in eternity,
nor can even the angels ever be satisfied with this joy for all
eternity, since they praise and extol this benefit of God with constant
and everlasting praise, sing with us, are happy, and rejoice, wishing us
happiness from the bottom of their hearts; so much is lacking that they
should begrudge us this.

2\. Therefore, if the state of my health suffers otherwise, let us set
aside for a time the history of the patriarch Joseph, in which we are
now engaged in the interpretation of the first book of Moses, and during
these days now approaching, let us consider the Incarnation of the Son
of God, our Lord, which is the greatest work of all works, and the most
glorious miracle of all miracles, and such a great benefit to the human
race that we would give up our spirits in great joy if we could grasp
and measure the greatness of this benefit with our hearts.

But this cannot happen in this life, in this weakness. No power of
eloquence can explain this supreme good deed and mystery with words, no
human mind can reach it with thoughts: That the Son of God deigns to
become man and my brother; that he so joins me, so excludes himself from
me, so unites himself, so closely and so closely unites himself with me
and attaches himself to me, that no man on this earth, even if he were
bound to me with the most intimate bond of friendship and with the most
sacred right of closest blood friendship, could be devoted to me with
greater and closer kinship, more intimate and more connected; that I can
and should expect more and greater things from him, and more important
things, than from any man in the world, even if he is most devoted and
devoted to me, that the inclination of his love for me is infinitely
more ardent than the love of the most tried and trusted man in the
world.

The love of a brother for another whom he loves dearly, or the love of a
godly father for his little son whom he loves most tenderly.

4\. although, as I have said, the human mind cannot fully grasp and
comprehend the greatness of this benefit, and cannot exhaust this
inexhaustible fountain of infinite mercy and kindness, yet we must
strive to taste a few drops of this benefit, and suckle at the breasts
like little children, and be nourished with milk and soft food until we
grow strong, and grow into a perfect man, who is in the measure of the
perfect age of Christ \[Eph. 4, 13.\]. Therefore, we must be diligent
and persevering in the contemplation of the divine word, so that these
benefits are brought into the ears, eyes and hearts, inculcated,
instilled, attached to them, and the memory of them must be renewed
continually, lest they be forgotten among us, lest, being sluggish and
sleepy, we fall away from so great a benefit, and through our laziness,
carelessness and ingratitude lose these inestimable goods. For this
reason, the Church has decreed certain days on which, putting aside all
other business and worries with which the human race is occupied after
the Fall, we are to do this most wonderful work of God, which was
decided in the secret council of the Trinity before the beginning of all
things out of the most ardent love for us exceedingly wretched human
beings, and which was accomplished at a certain and predetermined time,
and we are to speak among ourselves with pleasure of this exceedingly
comforting union of the divine and human natures of Christ, which no
human, indeed no angelic tongue can sufficiently explain. And in this
way we shall not only comfort ourselves, but also endeavor to propagate
this only salvation and light of all nations to the posterity, according
to the example of the prophet, who rejoices with joy in the spirit, and
breaks forth into these words:

**V. 2. The people walking in darkness see a great light 2c.**

**\
**96 L. xxiii, 305-3U7. Competitive explanation of Isa. 9, 2. -riz. vi,
154-157. 97

5 This text has been challenged by Satan in many ways, especially by the
Jews. It has not been explained in the same way by our people either.
Therefore, we must strive to have a pure and simple mind, and throw away
all thorns, briers and thistles, which prevent us from being certain,
without any wavering, and without any doubt, that this passage cannot be
understood by anyone other than the Son of God, who was born of the
virgin. Where this understanding is not certain and fixed before all
things, it brings no true joy, no benefit follows, but doubt remains; as
long as this is there, the human mind can have no true joy, no thorough
peace. For the conscience wants to be so instructed and fortified that
it can hold on to something certain about the work of its blessedness,
and say: The matter is indeed thus, and not otherwise. If faith is to be
certain in itself, and not waver and succumb, then the heart must have
this sense and this joy of faith, and be fixed in it. If another and
again another sense and nose is ascribed to the text, then all comfort
and even the reason for joy is annulled. Therefore, we must make every
effort to have the pure, simple, genuine and unified sense of the Holy
Scripture, where it can be had, as it can certainly be had here.

\(6\) The Jews scoff at ours, saying, This passage is not properly drawn
by us from Christ, because it can and should be understood by another.
But I ask: Tell me by which other it should be understood? What is his
name? They say: Hezekiah. For Isaiah was his teacher, whom Isaiah
brought up in such a way that great hopes were placed in him. This one
was given as a gift, as the future king of justice and peace. This one
was also a peaceable, godly and just king. Therefore, this son, of whom
he speaks that he was given, should and can be understood by him. The
people also rejoiced at that time over the slain war army of the

King of Assyria, about Sanherib, who was killed by his sons, about the
booty it had collected in the war. At that time also the clothes and
everything were stained with blood 2c. These were, they say, the causes
of the great joy that Isaiah describes here. This is the opinion of the
Jews of this text.

\(7\) But they are far, nay, utterly mistaken. And whoever holds with
this opinion of the Jews has lost both the true text and the highest
joy, which this text gives us. The text itself disproves these fables
and gossip, and convicts the Jews of quite obvious error. For it speaks
of such a child and son, who is born and given to us, who sits on the
throne of David, that he may judge him and strengthen him from now on
until eternity, whose reign shall be great, and his peace shall be
without end. Here answer me, thou Jew, and whosoever else thou art that
makest this text to waver, and turnest it to another thing, and drawest
it not to Christ, whether Hezekiah hath made his dominion great? whether
he hath had peace without end? whether he hath strengthened the kingdom
upon the throne of David from henceforth even for ever? 1) Name me one
who is a prince of peace, that is, of everlasting peace, and a king of
righteousness, that is, of everlasting righteousness. Name him, I say.
For these are clear words: \"His reign shall be great, and there shall
be no end of peace.\" You, Jew, must not pervert the words of the
prophet, you must not twist and weaken his speech; that does not take
place, that you teach him, and put into his mouth what he should speak.
He speaks too clearly here for you to distort his meaning and twist it
to your own opinion. He says: \"A child is born to us, a son is given to
us. His dominion shall be great, and there shall be no end of peace.\"

8\) The angel repeats this when he speaks to Mary in Luc. 1, 32. 33:
\"God the Lord will give him the throne of his father David, and he will
be king over the land.

1\) In the Erlangen edition the words are missing: st sorroUorationsrn
\[nxsr \[sdsrn David a inodo st ns\^ns in 8smpitsrnuni?

98 D. xxin, 307-310. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 157-160. 99

House of Jacob forever, and his kingdom shall have no end.\" Here the
kingdom is given without end, and is given to one person, not to
descendants; it is given to one child and this son, who has no
descendants. This Person is but One, but the same is to Himself an
everlasting King, and a King of everlasting righteousness and peace.
What can be objected here either by a Jew, or by reason, or by any man?
It is said: The kingdom shall always be enlarged (and though this
enlargement may be perverted, yet that which follows, and is connected
with it, cannot be perverted), the kingdom shall be eternal, having
everlasting peace, righteousness, and judgment. Now take all the kings
from the first beginning, whom Josiah, Hezekiah, Solomon, David, and as
many of them have been, to whom one could point this: surely you will
have none.

\(9\) Neither is father nor mother given to this son (though it is given
to him, but not by name). Nor does he say that this son or this
offspring will have subsequent heirs. Nevertheless, he shall have a
kingdom eternal in increase, and a kingdom of everlasting righteousness
and life. This can be none other than the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour,
and none other besides Him. Let him arise who can overthrow and refute
this. I would certainly like to see and hear him; but no one will ever
appear. For none other can be found than this our Savior, who was born
of a child, that is, was truly man, sat on the throne of David, and
reigned over the house of Jacob. And the angel Luc. 1, 32. 33. clarifies
these words when he says: \"The Lord will give him the throne of his
father David\" 2c. These are not the angel\'s words, or at that time
first of all brought forward by the angel, but they are taken from this
passage; for he did not use his own words as well as those of the
prophet.

10 Accordingly, this text concludes by a clear and irrefutable
implication that this child and this son are natural and

must be true God, because to give eternal peace, to bring eternal
justice, to reign forever, is as much as to sit on the throne in the
kingdom of God. And this is done by God alone, these things belong to
God alone. Then he also concludes that he is a natural and true man,
because he is the son of David.

Isaiah was enlightened with a great light and incredible revelation of
the Holy Spirit, because he described so clearly and precisely both the
humanity and the divinity of Christ. And like Isaiah, the other prophets
also preached the Messiah very clearly, and insisted that he was true
God and one Lord over all, just as we also preach. But as our papists
hear and believe, so do the Jews. But this is the unbelievable and
greatest wickedness of the Jews, and obdurate obstinacy and godlessness,
that they not only read the prophets, but also hear today that it is so
clearly taught, so obviously proven, that Christ is true God and man,
and yet with such great diligence falsify and corrupt the most obvious
text.

12\. there are also among the Christians such people, who do it here,
like the Jews judaizant). I would never have believed that our bishops
and shepherds would be so ignorant and lazy that they would let the Jews
become so powerful against this so clear text that they have even
overturned the faith of some Christians and drawn them to the Jewish
religion. Therefore, this must be diligently and often impressed upon
the people, so that they may be guarded against the Jews and
Mahometists, so that if they should ever get into a dispute with the
Jews, they may be able to refute them.

\(13\) Therefore we must be careful above all things to cut down and
refute the hedges and thorns, that is, the false opinions, and to throw
them away, and to have a purified text, so that we may be sure that
Isaiah speaks only of the one Lord, our Savior JESUS CHRIST, who is true
God and man. For if we want to rejoice in the unspeakable mercy of God,
then this must be established with us and believed by us, it must
necessarily be before

100 L. XXIII, 310-312. extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 2. W. VI,
160-162. 101

Be certain of all things and stand firm that we are brothers and fellow
angels, and lords of devils, lords over the world, death, hell, sin. For
the prophet uses splendid and peculiar words. He says: \"You have broken
the yoke of their burden, and the rod of their shoulder, and the rod of
their driver.\" Likewise, \"A child is born to us.\" These words testify
that through this Son great things, yea, verily the very greatest
things, were accomplished; but what He did, He did not do for Himself;
He did not seek His best; what He acquired, He did not keep for Himself;
but what He did, what He endured in labor and toil, what He took upon
Himself in burden, He did for our sake, He sought our best. He has
earned and deserved eternal righteousness and peace and the eternal
kingdom for us.

14 But you may say, \"How did he acquire and bring these things to me?
How will I one day be made a partaker of his righteousness, peace and
kingdom? By what ways and means can I attain to it? I do not feel
righteousness but sin in my flesh, and I am dead in sins, and I see that
the whole human race dies in sins and is caught in sins; I feel that in
my flesh I am tempted, caught and carried away to avarice, to pride, to
lust, to adultery; in short, I feel nothing but pure sin. Where is sin
taken away here, and how does it happen? Where shall righteousness come
from? Through the law? But the law doubles this evil; it stirs up sin
and increases it; it only makes wrath and death more bitter, because the
sinner, when he feels the greatness of his sins and hears the judgment
of the law, must necessarily be oppressed by death, terrified in heart,
and struck down. For this is the irrevocable saying of the law: Cursed
be every man that doeth not all things which are written in the book of
the law 2c. \[Deut. 27:26, Gal. 3:10.\]

\(15\) Therefore, the law can do nothing but bring death and kill; it is
the most cruel and ruthless driver and killer.

Executioner, it tortures, torments, distresses and anguishes the sinner
in the most miserable way. I find nothing of comfort, advice, hope, help
or refreshment in it. If I flee from it, I cannot escape from it; it
keeps me trapped and bound in the middle; instead of one devil, seven of
them present themselves to me, so that nowhere remains open for escape,
and the sinner has no protection at all in the law.

16 What hope is there here, what help? There is nothing anywhere but in
Christ alone. In him alone I lean, in him I take comfort, that this King
has this name and title, that he is a King of righteousness and
everlasting peace. Therefore he has this title, that he has brought
about this righteousness and peace for me. Where there is sin and death,
there cannot be righteousness and peace. Therefore, it is necessary for
this King of righteousness and peace to abolish death and sin, otherwise
there is no hope, no counsel, no remedy. By no other way, by no other
means can one attain to this unified righteousness and peace. If sin and
death are not taken away, there can be no peace or rest. But these are
taken away, destroyed, done away with, and extinguished by this King.

This is the brief content of the Gospel, which is summarized in this
text, that through Christ we are freed from death, sin, the law and
hell, and transferred to the kingdom of life, righteousness and peace.
Likewise, we boast that we are children of God, that God is our Father,
that Christ is our brother, that we are co-heirs with Christ, judges of
angels, and princes over devils. All things are ours, but we are
Christ\'s, says the apostle 1 Cor. 3, 22. 23. But who believes this? The
Jews and also our own opinions and doubts prevent and stand in the way,
so that we do not believe this so consistently, and can certainly
convince ourselves of it.

\(18\) Therefore, let us cast away the erroneous and ungodly opinions of
the Jews; let us also put aside our speculations and conclusions of our
reason and doubts, and not be uncertain that this text alone.

102 L. xxni, 3I2-M4. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, it\>2-i6s.
103

talk about Christ. If we remain with Christ alone, then the words of our
text, if not making us drunk with wine, will certainly present us with
breasts, and refresh and nourish us with milk.

\(19\) This I have said to clear away all other opinions, and that we
may be sure that here the prophet speaks of Christ alone, that there may
be this firm ground that Christ alone is the King of eternal
righteousness and eternal peace. No mortal king has had eternal peace,
nor can he give it; none has had eternal righteousness, nor can he give
it; none has overcome death and sin, none has satisfied the law, none
has been able or is able to free the conscience from its terror and
trembling 2c. Therefore one must stick to the grammar and the literal
understanding and hold fast to it; and this passage is not to be
understood differently than by this one and only King, who is truly the
Son of God, yes, God Himself, full of grace and truth, and yet also a
man, because He was born as a child 2c.

20 Now that we have laid this foundation, let us proceed to the text. I
have found it good not to refer to the preceding words \[v. 1\] from the
previous time, but to pass over them. For it can be disputed whether
they must be understood from the Assyrian captivity or from another. I
will begin the chapter with this passage:

V. 2: **The people who walk in darkness see a great light, and it shines
brightly on those who dwell in the land of darkness.**

21 This is truly a great assurance of faith and a great boldness of this
holy prophet, that he speaks so shamefully of his people, who were
Moses\' disciples, that they walk and dwell in darkness and the shadow
of death.

22\. this word of the Holy Spirit the world can in no way suffer to be a
nation of those who walk in darkness. The present lines also testify to
this. The pope cannot suffer that we say to him: You are in darkness,
you are mistaken. Likewise

The Turks, too, cannot stand it when people say of them that they are in
darkness and error; they set their light, their Alkoran, against it. The
wise refer to their wisdom, to their civil rights and laws, which are
the most \"beautiful\" stars and lights. Likewise also the medicine, the
wisdom, the good arts are very beautiful stars. The Jews put forward
their law; they boast that they are Mosi\'s disciples, and say: \"Should
we walk in darkness? Isaiah, are you not quite wise to refrain from
saying such things about the disciples of Moses, about the people and
property of God? How can such careless words escape you? We are
certainly a people of light and walk in the light. We have Abraham as
our father, we have the prophets. How could we be blind? How should we
walk in darkness?

The prophet does not turn to all this glory of the fathers, of the law,
of property, of their wisdom; he resolves and grasps all men, Jews and
Gentiles, in this misery and miserable state of life, that they are
blind, unwise, ignorant, godless, foolish, in short, that they walk in
darkness. Who should be able to suffer this?

\(24\) But the prophet speaks of a different light, of a different
wisdom, righteousness and peace, than of a human wisdom, light, reason,
or of all that a man can boast of, or of the gifts with which a man is
endowed, not even of the law. This must be a completely different light,
which this child and this son brings with him, with which he is to cover
and illuminate the darkness. But what kind of light is it? Is it the
wisdom of the world? Is it the law of Moses? Not at all; but he brings
the light of eternal peace, of eternal righteousness, and of the eternal
kingdom.

Moses illuminates his worldly regiment with the righteousness from the
ceremonial and moral law, which was commanded by God. The pope also
illuminates his lantern, or rather his cloak, with his decrees and
decretal; Mahomet illuminates his with his alcoran. The philosophers
also boast of their wisdom, their light of reason;

1042- xxm, 314-3i6. More expansive explanation of Isa. 9, 2. W. vi,
iss-168. 105

but this light, this wisdom is nothing; they are all temporal things,
all subject to death. No king of the Jews, no monarchs, however
powerful, have brought the light of peace, justice and eternal life that
this child and this son have brought. Therefore, all people in the
world, Jews and Gentiles, walk in darkness, however righteous, however
holy, however wise, however powerful they may be. But if the Jewish
people walk in darkness, what will the Gentiles boast of? If the law of
Moses does not enlighten, wisdom and the light of reason enlighten much
less.

26 This is the first armor with which the prophet overthrows all that
there is of light, wisdom, reason, 2c. Therefore it follows from this
passage that the prophet spoke of such a child, who would not give or
bring a law or establish a worldly government, but that he spoke of the
eternal Lord, of the King of eternal peace and eternal righteousness.

The Jews understand nothing of the content and main purpose of this
text, and they leave nothing of it pure and unadulterated, but they
falsify all and every word. By the darkness they understand the sinners
(peccatores), and after that they invent that the law of Moses will be
eternal, and will not be abolished even at the time of the Messiah, but
will be fortified and resurrected at the same time as your temple,
ceremonies, sacrifices and services. In short, they let themselves dream
that the Messiah will be such a king as Solomon was; therefore nothing
intelligible is to be found among them.

\(28\) Therefore, let us leave off their talk and listen to the prophet,
what he preaches about the child who is given to us. This one child, he
says, this one person, who will have no children, no natural heirs, will
be a king of eternal righteousness. If the Messiah is to be such, namely
an eternal king, it follows that he will not be mortal, or subject to
death; as the Jews dream that the Messiah and his children would die.
But this text does not lie, since it says: He will live and reign
forever, and in everlasting righteousness.

and peace. When Christ said John 12:32 ff, \"If you will exalt the Son
of Man,\" the people asked Him, \"Who is this Son of Man of whom you say
that He will be exalted? We have heard in the law that Christ abideth
forever.\" These Jews at the time of Christ had good and true thoughts
about the Messiah, not such foolish and godless thoughts as the Jews of
today have, who think that the Messiah\'s kingdom will be physical and
that he, the Messiah, will be a mortal king. On the other hand, the Jews
of Christ\'s time concluded thus: Christ cannot be hanged, because he
will remain forever; therefore they judge that it is contrary to the law
that he should be exalted or put to death. This was impressed upon the
people by the pure teachers, and stuck with them, and they also drew
this belief, of the Messiah\'s eternity, from this and similar passages
of the prophets.

\(29\) Therefore the Jews of this present time are quite senseless and
bereft of all understanding, that they say, contrary to the teaching and
opinion of their forefathers, that the Messiah will be mortal; further,
that the law will not be abolished, but will be established as an
eternal light. But if the Messiah is to be mortal, he certainly cannot
be a king of eternal righteousness. Likewise, if the law is to remain
always, why was Christ promised to the fathers before the law, who was
to bring a different and better kind of teaching than the law was? Here
one can see how great, how astonishing and appalling their blindness is,
how they do not understand the Scriptures at all. Therefore, let us give
thanks to God that we know that the Messiah is the true Son of God, yes,
the true God, and became man for our sake, and dwelt among us, that we
might see His glory 2c., Joh. 1, 14.

30 Therefore the prophet calls the Jews who deny that Christ is the
eternal king and that his kingdom is spiritual, such people who walk in
thick and deep darkness, and says: \"You foolish and blind Jews dream
that the Messiah will be a secular monarch, as Alexander and Augustus
were; likewise that the law with its sacrifices, the temple, ceremonies,
and the sacraments will not be respected.

106 **L. XXIII, 316-319. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
168-171.** 107

But you are far wrong, yes, completely wrong. For the Messiah will come
in his time, bringing with him another light, the most excellent and
brightest, which will illuminate this darkness and the people who walk
in darkness. And you yourselves are the people of God, to you these
promises have been made, to you the hope of this light has been given.
But this light has not yet been revealed, the Holy Spirit has not yet
been given; therefore the light has not yet dawned; but it will dawn.

He calls light the knowledge of justice, peace, and the eternal kingdom.
With this light our souls must be enlightened. If I do not have this
light or this knowledge of Christ, of his eternal righteousness, and of
all his benefits, which he has acquired for me, and with which all the
saints are endowed, then there is no hope at all, no help nor remedy
left in the whole world, then I have nothing to comfort me in the hour
of death and in the last battle of death, Then I will have to despair of
my blessedness, I will not be able to stand before God\'s judgment, I
will not be able to escape the accusation of the law, I will not be able
to be freed from Satan\'s power, I will not be able to rule over sin,
death, the devil, and over all evil that lies on the human race because
of sin.

32\. But since Christ has cleansed us from all sin with his blood, has
conquered death through his glorious victory, and has nailed the law to
the cross, we can now be sure that God\'s wrath has been quenched and
that we have been reconciled to him through the Son, that the law can
neither arrogate to itself any right over us, nor can it come to us by
accusation, that Satan can exercise wedged tyranny over us, that sin and
death cannot subdue us and rule over us, so that we can be assured of
our eternal blessedness at the hour of death.

\(33\) This knowledge, and being endowed with this knowledge of Christ,
is the light with which the hearts of the godly are illuminated by one
God.

The Holy Spirit will enlighten you. If one does not know this from
Christ, then Christ will be of no use. If I were not to hope for this
from Christ, but were only to obtain moral wisdom or worldly prudence
from him, I would not care about Christ, and I would not want him, but
would rather choose a legal book in his place. For in civil law there
are excellent and glorious sayings about virtues, and better ones than
in spiritual law. Or I would read some philosophical books, or Cicero\'s
books of duties; which contain exquisite teachings of virtue and morals,
and in this way are the most excellent writings; and nothing better can
be presented to the youth to instruct them to an honorable life,
pleasant manners and good conduct. If Christ were to bring me no other
than human light, I would not long for him; nor would he be of any use,
since, as I have said, so many philosophers, so many wise men, so
knowledgeable of law and legislation, have left behind for posterity
such excellent books, which could provide us with as much light and
wisdom as we need to live this life well and happily.

\(34\) But this is an entirely different light, which is promised here
and is to be expected from Christ. This is a wisdom above all wisdom, a
knowledge above all knowledge, which teaches us what sin is, what power
it has, and how it is removed. It also teaches what death is and how we
can be freed from it. It teaches what the devil is, what his tyranny is,
and how he is overcome, how we are snatched from his tyranny. It teaches
us what is man, what is flesh, what is spirit, what is true, thorough
and eternal peace and righteousness. That one can distinguish all this,
likewise that one knows how one should be transferred and led over from
the captivity of the law into the most free freedom, from death into
life, from sin into righteousness, and that after this life one will
live an eternal life with God, in the highest glory, peace and joy,

108 L. xxm, 316-32i. Broader explanation of Isa. 9, 2. W. vi, m-m. 109

this is the true light and wisdom, which is far preferable to all human
wisdom, however excellent and admirable it may be; indeed, no human
wisdom can in any way compare with this heavenly and divine light.

What is the wisdom of all philosophers when held against them? What can
the collected wisdom of all sages bring about? What was the use of
Cicero and the philosophers for their very beautiful teachings, which
were full of wisdom and worthy of being known for their good manners,
discipline and arts, since they were not illuminated by this sun and
light of eternal wisdom? Cicero has written and taught excellently about
virtues, prudence, temperance and other things, and Aristotle has also
written and taught excellently about morality. Both men\'s books are
very useful and highly necessary for the establishment of this life;
however, true wisdom cannot be learned from their writings, as excellent
as they are. For they do not teach me how to be freed from sins, from
death, from hell; they cannot cheer up or pacify the troubled
conscience; they cannot show the way how to come to God in the Kingdom
of Heaven; they cannot teach me a true knowledge of God and myself.

36\. If you were to enter into a conversation about these things with
the wisest man who has ever been among those excellent philosophers, and
ask him to show you a way to come to God, how to escape eternal death,
so that you may become immortal and enjoy eternal joy in the Kingdom of
Heaven with God; If, I say, you wanted to ask the wisest philosopher
about these things, about this wisdom, and about this light, he would
not be able to answer you, and if he were not a vain man, he would
certainly freely confess to you that he knew nothing about these things.

37 Cicero and some others have written about the immortality of the
soul.

but they betray themselves here and there that they themselves did not
constantly believe in this immortality of souls. For so Cicero writes
somewhere: In death there is nothing evil. If the feeling remains in it,
then it is to be regarded more for an immortality than for a death; but
if it is lost, then it must not be regarded for a misery, which one then
feels. Does he not seem to waver here, and to be in doubt? Surely they
meant that the body itself dies and perishes completely, and they knew
nothing of its resurrection. But I want to live not only according to
the soul, but also according to the body. \"I want the body to come back
to the soul and be united with it, which I now carry around on this
earth, burdened with sins, misery and misery. If a philosopher should be
asked about these things and about the resurrection of the bodies, he
would know nothing to answer. \"There is no one there.\" He would have
to fall silent to these questions, because he is, as the prophet says
here, the people so walking in darkness.

38\. But when this Son comes, he will bring the true light, the true
wisdom. He will say: \"Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world\"
\[Joh. 16, 33\]. \"I live, and you also shall live\" \[John 14:19\]. He
is our righteousness, our salvation, our blessedness and eternal
happiness; He has earned and purchased for us the kingdom of heaven.
When I am afraid of sins, when I am shaken by the horror of death, when
the fear of hell is in my mind, I know immediately to whom I can take
refuge; I have someone whom I can oppose all these things, namely
Christ, my Lord. Through him sin is blotted out for me, since I believe
in him, death is destroyed and expelled, hell is destroyed, and the
devil is overcome.

We are captives under the law, sin and death. These three enemies are
the cruelest tyrants, who are very hostile to all the godly. There has
never been one of the godly who has not been terrified, tormented and
martyred by these tyrants according to the flesh. How should

HO L. XXIII, 321-323. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI, 174-176.
ill.

What should we do when these enemies attack us? What shall we do when
these enemies attack us? There is no counsel anywhere, and you will not
rest until you grasp this word: The King Christ is born as a little
child, the Son is given to us, who says John 14:19: \"I live, and you
also shall live.\" When death, sin and the law hear this Son mentioned,
they immediately tremble, are frightened, terrified, take flight, and
cannot suffer this Son to be mentioned, because the law, sin and death
accused this Child, brought Him to the cross and killed Him, but
innocently and undeservedly. They wanted to overcome him and to rule
over him; but they pushed against the light, against the Godhead itself,
which could not sin, which could not die, which could not be subjected
to the law in any way. That he therefore allowed himself to be accused,
that he allowed himself to be nailed to the cross, that he allowed
himself to be killed, he did this for our sake. This child has atoned
for all and done enough; this son has led the prison captive. I believe
in this son; therefore the law, sin and death have as much right over me
as they have over this son, that is, no right at all, because he paid
for me as an innocent man. Precisely because they killed this innocent
man, they lost all their right against me. Before this, death, sin, the
law, cannot stand. Death, sin, the law, are overcome by the word: \"A
child is born to us, a son is given to us.\" So everything flows
together in this Son, the whole benefit of salvation has to be thanked
to him.

\(40\) In this way, let us treat this text for our comfort and to
strengthen our faith and hope. Now, as I have said, the object
(argumentum) or subjectum, as Aristotle calls it, in this passage which
we have undertaken to treat and explain, is \"the child,\" the Son, who
was to be king on the throne of David, and to reign forever. These are
very clear words that cannot be wavered nor denied.

If we take this as the basis of the actual content, of which Isaiah
speaks very much and extensively in his whole book, then we can also
understand this passage correctly and take a firm comfort from it. To
this end, and to this main proposition, all the words and verses of this
passage fit very well, and can also be interpreted without difficulty to
this opinion. And what is objected to it does not serve the purpose,
yes, it is obviously devilish. And because the content of these words
does not allow that this could be said or understood in any way by a
physical king in this life or time, neither by King Solomon, nor by
Josiah, nor by Hezekiah, nor by any other, it follows that here both the
resurrection of the dead and the life after this life are included.

The people,\" he says, \"walking in darkness, see a great light.\" This
light, as I 33 ff\] said, cannot be understood from the present bodily
light, but from the eternal light. If it is understood from the eternal
light, then it follows that another, and indeed an immortal life is
future. And if this light were not understood to be an eternal light, it
would be in conflict with this king. For since he is an eternal king,
this light must also be eternal, or last into eternal life, or be a
light of eternal life, of eternal righteousness, of eternal peace. Thus,
I say, this light must be taken here, lest the words or members depart
from the whole of the text and opinion, and be at variance therewith.

42 Furthermore, \"the people that walk in darkness\" is first of all the
Jewish people, but after that the Gentile people, as Paul used to say
\[Rom. 1:16\]: \"The Jews first of all, and also the Greeks.\" The Jews
indeed walk and are under the law, they do much, they have a zeal for
God; but with lack of understanding. And this is really \"walking in
darkness,\" when works are heaped up, when sacrifices are made, when
fasting is done, and everything is done; but without light, without
knowledge of this child who is a king, and without knowledge of his
righteousness and eternal peace. There then are all sacrifices, all
fasting,

112 L. XXIII, 323-328. More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 2. W. VI,
I77-I7S. 113

The effort in all works, however difficult and much they may be, is
nothing but pure darkness.

\(43\) The Jews are very displeased that all their works, all their
sacrifices, and the observance of their other ceremonies, however
superstitious and diligent, should be darkness. The Gentiles also become
mad when they hear that the apostles, who were apparently a small kind
of people, who had no outward power, and who attracted the eyes of men
by no outward splendor, 1) preach this light, that it is the true light,
the true and only truth, that one should know that the crucified Christ
is the Son of David and the eternal King of eternal righteousness and
eternal peace, and that one should believe in Him alone. Since they
taught this, they were assailed with every kind of opprobrium. Then they
cried out: they fought against all reason and were furious, they threw
all kingdoms overboard, they made the whole world go astray. How? should
you condemn our fathers and ancestors? They certainly walked in
exquisite wisdom and righteousness, they were wise and just men. How can
you be so insolent as to call these most beautiful virtues darkness? But
Isaiah did not turn to these their impulses; he spoke this joyfully 2c.

**The people who walk in darkness see a great light.**

44\. what kind of light? The light of the sun, or the light of this life
and of reason? No. These are also excellent lights. The sunlight is
common to men and cattle, and it is the brightest light of this world,
but it is nothing compared to the light of the eternal kingdom and
eternal righteousness. The sun has now already shone five thousand five
hundred and forty-five years 2) but has not made a man eternal.

1\) The words: \"and the eyes - pulled\" are missing in the Wittenberg.

2\) This date does not contradict the date we gave for the time of the
writing of this scripture, namely 1543, because we often find that the
editors of Luther\'s writings changed the numbers set by him according
to the time in which they prepared them for printing.

Life illuminates. The light of the sun and the light of reason are
indeed splendid lights. Who would not recognize these lights as
excellent lights? Who would despise them? Who would not admire the so
great light of the sun that illuminates the whole world? Who would wish
to live if there were no light at all, or if it left us only for a few
days?

\(45\) As the light of the sun is excellent and admirable, so is the
light of reason, and reason is a far more glorious light than the light
of the sun; indeed, reason with its wisdom is a heaven full of light and
stars. What the sun cannot do, reason can. And yet, just as a light or a
lamp hardly illuminates a point when compared with the sun, which most
clearly distinguishes the colors of things and shows how they differ
from one another, so these excellent and admirable lights, the sun and
reason, are hardly little lamps, lanterns, or wax candles when compared
with the other light of which the prophet speaks.

\(46\) For this is truly the great light, because it teaches and
enlightens our hearts. It does not shine and illuminate in the way that
the sun or reason shine and illuminate, neither of which has any light
of eternal righteousness, eternal life, and eternal peace. But this
great light shines in such a way that I know that sin is condemned,
death is killed, hell is destroyed, the devil is overcome and captured,
and man is freed from the tyranny of all these enemies through this
child and through this Son. Only this is and can rightly be called a
great light, which teaches us how sin, death, hell, Satan are overcome,
which teaches us about eternal righteousness, peace and life. These
unspeakable benefits the born child brings with him and gives to us.
Certainly, these things are far and infinitely greater than anything
that any wisdom of reason teaches.

47 This is what Isaiah means when he calls this light a great light.
With this word he has preferred the majesty of this light to all the
things that have something of the light, and has told us this.

**114 L.** xxm, 32S-327. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
179-182. **115**

light. For he has to do with the fact that he is talking about the
kingdom of eternal righteousness, eternal life and peace. Therefore he
speaks of the light that is proper to this kingdom, which is Christ
Himself \[John 1:9\]: \"This is the true light, which lighteth all men
that come into this world.\" Now follows:

**\[And upon them that dwell in the land of the shadow of death a light
is risen, or shineth upon them.**

48 It is a repetition of the same thing, because it is the same: \"the
people see a great light\", and \"it shines over the same\". But he
repeats one and the same thing in a twofold manner of speaking, so that
he may declare this light all the more emphatically: \"It is a great
light, and shineth fair brightly.\" When I say, \"It is a great light,
and it shines and shines very brightly,\" I am saying one and the same
thing in twofold speech; but the greatness of the light is increased
still more by the addition of the second speech, and explained more
emphatically, as I have already said.

49 But he expressly adds: In terra Zalmaveth, that is, \"in the land of
the shadow of death. Jews and Gentiles dwell in the land, they sit in
the kingdom, they are not strangers, they do not wander about as if they
did not have certain residences; but they dwell in the land, that is,
they have a certain residence, they are under a certain government and
regiment, in the light of their own wisdom, righteousness and peace; but
by the special benevolence of God, who miraculously preserves the
kingdoms and worldly regiments; otherwise there would be nothing but
pure disorder of the devil. Through God\'s preservation, therefore, the
worldly states have wisdom, government, the light of reason, they also
have peace for many years, they have their kings, their regents, who are
holy and just in a civil way. The Babylonian, the Assyrian, the Persian,
the Greek, the Roman empires have been governed by the light of reason,
have had their princes and rulers, distinguished by their excellent
wisdom and external justice; but they have, nevertheless, in the country

lived. In what country? In the country Zalmaveth, that is, of the
switching of the death. The Hebrews are still in dispute about whether
Zalmaveth means darkness or shadow of death. But our opinion is with St.
Lucas and the seventy interpreters that it actually means shadow of
death. For this is how St. Lucas \[Cap. 1, 79.\] actually translated it
from this passage of Isaiah in the Canticles of Zacharias.

50 But the prophet does not speak of those who have already died.
Because these do not concern us. But he calls the kingdom of this world
\"darkness,\" which is most beautifully illuminated by the sun and by
reason, which is seven times more beautiful and excellent than the sun.
Thus he calls \"darkness\" the very cleverest and wisest suggestions and
laws of reason or of the wisest men.

Reason is a very great and invaluable gift of God, and what it wisely
arranges and devises in human affairs is not to be despised. If
everything went according to its wishes and will, if its plans turned
out as fortunate and good as they are wisely and prudently conceived,
then it would truly accomplish something great and excellent. She can
found kingdoms and commonwealths, guard and fortify them with useful
laws, keep them in order and govern them with good counsel and wholesome
commandments, and prescribe many things that serve the preservation of
the commonwealths and the great benefit of human society. Nevertheless,
her suggestions do not always work, and she cannot fortify the worldly
regimes and kingdoms with so many, so wholesome and so sharp laws that
she could keep the wicked in check, so that there would not still be a
lack of many things every day, and so that sins would not be committed
more often. The best suggestions often turn out quite differently and
just the opposite. I say: If the counsels of reason had a happy course,
then it would certainly have cause to boast. But since even the best
counsels of reason so seldom have a happy course, reason is indeed a
light, but not a light that shines.

52\. although it is a light in its own way,

**116** L. XXIII, 327-329. extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 2. W. VI,
182-185. **117**

Yet this light is called darkness by the prophet. And reason, when it is
held against the heavenly light, is in fact nothing but darkness and
very thick darkness, that is, it does not understand anything about
spiritual wisdom, justice and peace. It cannot determine with certainty
what is the will of God toward us. It does not know what true peace is,
what true justice is before God. Both the Jews and the Gentiles walk in
this darkness, as the Scriptures testify \[Ps. 14, 2. 3. Rom. 3, 12Z:
They have all sinned 2c.; likewise: GOD has decided all under sin 2c.
\[Gal. 3, 22.\], and here the prophet says: \"They dwell in the land of
the shadow of death\" 2c.

\(53\) Therefore this life is the life of those who \"dwell in the
land,\" walk, rule, among whom many have the glorious name of being
righteous and wise, but they are all in darkness, or in the shadow of
death, which is the same thing. For the Scripture calls \"darkness\"
\"shadow of death,\" either to paraphrase this word, or to give it
emphasis, or also to indicate that it must be taken in an evil sense.
\"Shadow,\" however, is a word that in and of itself means nothing sad
or hateful; for in summer nothing is more pleasant and lovely than to be
covered by shadow. Therefore, the word \"shadow\" would have nothing
evil, harsh, ominous, or horrible in it if it were placed here alone.
But there is a genitive of another word, which is very sad and
frightening, namely \"of death\". This genitive deprives the word
\"shadow\" of everything that is pleasant and lovely about it, and makes
the word, which is pleasant and lovely in itself, very ugly, sad and
frightening. To the first taste it seems to be a lovely and wholesome
potion, but the added word, \"of death,\" indicates that it is a harmful
and poisonous potion. It is a piece of bread or meat that is beautiful
in appearance and pleasing to the appetite, but beware lest the first
appearance deceive you, because poison is hidden underneath. Now the
word \"shadow\" is often used in Scripture in a very good sense.

is used for refreshment, shelter, protection, and is a very pleasant and
very beautiful word. But the added word, \"of death,\" turns the
beautiful shade into something that is not beautiful at all, but ugly
and frightening. For the word \"death\" is something ugly, hideous and
frightening.

\(54\) If one wants to take \"darkness\" in an evil sense, then it is
nothing else than the shadow of death, because death is nothing else
than darkness. Thus Job says: \"In darkness is my bed made\" \[Job
17:13\]. If the light of the sun were to be darkened or cease, if the
sun of the world were not to shine, if one were to live without the sun,
then our life would not be life, but death itself, and a shadow of
death.

Thus darkness is called a shadow of death, because all who are in death
are in darkness. This is the nature of our life, even though it has the
greatest abundance of comforts of every kind and is overflowing with all
kinds of pleasures. All men are covered with this darkness, and in this
land of the shadow of death all men sit on the earth, not only the
afflicted, the unwise, the sinners, but also those who, according to the
human way, are the most wise, the most righteous, the most powerful on
earth. They are the most righteous, the most powerful on earth, who have
not yet been enlightened by the Word.

Thus Lucas clearly indicates that he speaks of this life when he says:
\"That he may appear to those who are in darkness, or \[as Isaiah has
it\] \"sit,\" that is, dwell. John the Baptist was not sent to those who
had already departed from this life, or to those who had died of bodily
death: and yet his father Zacharias says \[Lucas 1, 76-79.And thou child
shalt be called a prophet of the Highest: thou shalt go before the Lord,
to prepare his way, and shalt give knowledge of salvation unto his
people, which is in the remission of their sins, through the tender
mercies of our God, whereby he hath visited us from on high, to appear
unto them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death\" 2c. Does not
Zacharias here speak with the words of Jesus, and does he not take them,
as it were, from the mouth of the prophet, who-

118 L. XXIII, S29-S32. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, I8S-I87.
119

cher calls this life, and especially the Jewish land or dwelling, a land
of the shadow of death?

This agrees nicely with the subject and content of this passage, that he
speaks of the spiritual day and light of Christ, namely, of
enlightenment, of eternal righteousness, life and peace, and in contrast
also of the spiritual night, or darkness, namely, of Zalmaveth \[the
shadow of death\], and of the very terrifying night of the law, sin,
death, the devil and hell. Thus the words must be drawn to the whole
main subject. \"They that dwell in the land of the shadow of death,\"
that is, \"in the land of darkness,\" are the most wretched, miserable,
and afflicted of men. For they do not sit in the shade or in a pleasant
shade per se (for the shade alone, especially when it is hot, is very
pleasant), but they sit \"in the shadow of death,\" that is, in the very
thickest and deepest darkness. To these, I say, who sit in this shadow
of death, the light shines or shines forth, as the prophet says.

The Hebrew word Nagah \[XXX\] means to shine, to shine. Hence the noun
nogah shine, and is actually the shining, \"the radiance,\" as when the
rays spread out at the exit of the sun. This is what the epistle to the
Hebrews has in view when it calls Christ \"the brightness of the
Father\'s glory\" \[Heb. 1. 3.\]. For Christ is the Father\'s nogah, in
Greek *άπαύ- γασμα,* in Latin splendor, refulgentia or relucentia, in
German \"bright shine.\" The fire is the light, but the ray or radiance
that shines forth from the light is this nogah. This light and these
rays of blessedness, which are spread by this sun, this child and this
son, which has risen and been given to us, the Jews and Gentiles have
seen and still see. The light and the sun is Christ; the rays are the
Word of God, the Holy Communion, the Holy Baptism, the absolution, and
the miracles that he has done and is still doing. So Christ is also the
radiance in this world, just as he is the radiance of the glory of the
Father.

The rabbis do not know and understand anything of this, because they are
in Zalmaveth, and in even greater blindness; they do not have this light
and Nogah. But \'without this sun, without this nogah, that is, without
this brightness, there is nothing but pure darkness. Hence it comes that
in this place they translate Nogah by morning star (Luciferum), which
the Greeks call φώσφορον. But actually

Nogah is the shine, reappearance. The morning star is called in Hebrew
and this word is used by Isaiah Cap. 14, 12. where he says: \"How you
have fallen from heaven, you beautiful morning star!\"

\(60\) This is one part of the prophecy, that the light has dawned
through this child and for the sake of this child, or that this child is
the author of it, as the king of eternal righteousness, light and peace.
Now this light first dawned on the Jews, but not only on the Jews, but
also on the Gentiles. But what kind of light is it? It is by far the
greatest and brightest light, since it enlightens those who sit in
spiritual darkness and in the shadow of death; it frees them from sin,
from the law, from death, from hell, from damnation. This light brings
with it the knowledge of the divine mysteries, wisdom, righteousness,
peace and eternal life. What is the light of reason or the sun against
this new and admirable light? Nothing, and only darkness. Now follows:

V. 3: **You make many things for the Gentiles, but you do not make many
pleasures.**

The holy men, the prophets, have suffered much from this very wicked and
worthless people, they have been plagued with many miseries, miseries
and misfortunes, they have suffered and been rewarded with the greatest
hatred and envy; then, when they have sought the best of the people,
they have received the most terrible thanks for their very holy work and
preaching and exceedingly wholesome exhortations to godliness and
blameless living. They inculcated faith and love with all diligence and
zeal, they deterred people from vices and misdeeds; but they
accomplished little or nothing, they saw that no or little fruit
resulted.

**120** ö. xxm, 332-334. broader explanation of Is. 9, 3. w. vi,
187-190. **121**

In the face of such ingratitude, ungodliness and wickedness of the
people, they could do nothing else than what we do: they cried out,
sighed, comforted and strengthened themselves with the expectation of
the future of the Messiah, and asked with fervent desires for his
future, just as we today sigh and cry under our burdens: Come, dear
Lord, come! We are tired of life, and wish to be resolved and to be with
Christ. For what should we do in the world? Wherever you turn,
everything is full of distress; there is nothing in the world that could
please you, that could truly delight you.

The kingdoms of the world are places of licentiousness (sunt anarchiae).
The people despise the sermons, make a mockery of the Word, ridicule
God, their Creator and Redeemer; what God threatens and reminds through
His servants is considered a mere fairy tale. Even the Son, the Child,
the King of eternal righteousness, is regarded as nothing, completely
worthless, he is not held in honor; his infinite benefits, which he
offers us, are despised with the greatest ingratitude and trampled
underfoot, his honor is stolen from him; through the masses and other
idolatries he is insulted with horrible blasphemies even by those who
want to be regarded as the holiest.

The Jews, too, did not consider the Promised Land to be anything, and in
their vanity they fell away from God. The prophets were very indignant
about this; it must have pained them greatly to see that they
themselves, their teachings and the promises they made to them about the
Messiah were despised. Therefore they concluded: \"The Messiah will
indeed come, but he will come in such a way that he will disgrace you
godless and wicked evil-doers, who are puffed up by such great
arrogance, yes, he will make you fall into folly and rage. You will be
more annoyed by his arrival than happy about it. This is the subject of
the previous eighth chapter \[vv. 14, 15\], where the prophet says: \"He
will be a stumbling block and a rock of trouble to the two houses of
Israel, a snare and a fall to the citizens of Jerusalem. And many shall
stumble against it, and fall, and be broken.

break, be entangled and caught.\" As if he wanted to say: You do not
want to hear us, you throw all threats to the wind, you do not care
about the promises. Therefore, one day you will receive the reward that
these deeds of yours are worth. When the Messiah will come and preach to
you, then you will fall, then you will bump, in such a way that you will
be completely disturbed and perish in the most miserable way. For Christ
by his brightness has shocked them terribly. This very thing also Simeon
prophesied of this child, saying \[Luc. 2:34.\], \"This one is set for a
fall, and for a sign to be contradicted.\" For when this light rises (as
we see that it also happens now), Satan rages and rages, \"the nations
rage, the kings rebel against the Lord and His anointed,\" Ps. 2:1, 2.
All princes, all bishops, all wise men rage and rage with one accord and
with equal fury, with united forces and according to cultivated counsel
against this light and this truth.

But what does God do in the meantime? He does not want these rays of His
righteousness, life and peace to shine and shine in vain. He does not
want this child to be born in vain, he does not want this son to be
given to us in vain. He does not want him to be a servant, but a king
who sits on the throne and reigns. But for the fortification of the
kingdom of the Messiah not only One Person is needed, therefore He has
His special people. This people is troubled in all places; hence comes
the raging and raging, hence comes the murmuring, the counseling and
speaking against the Lord and his anointed. Why do you all come
together? What are your plots? What are you planning? Are ye not rightly
wise? Are you not in your right mind? What madness drives you? With what
fury do you proceed? Do you not consider against whom you are rebelling?
You are rebelling against the Lord, whose best ways are unknowable,
whose best judgments are hidden and whose power is infinite. Everything
you do against him will be in vain and will fall back on your head.

66\. so the prophets agree with each other

122 L. XXIII, 334-336. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 190-193.
123

They agree with each other by describing the kingdom of Christ as such,
as the apostles also saw and experienced it, as we also learn through
our experience and see it today. The more people come to the Gospel, the
more the adversaries rage. Now they boast and defy us again, and rely on
the presence of the emperor, of whom they believe that he has armed
himself against us, and now they make the most certain hope that we will
soon be put to death.

67\. But so many hopes, so many attempts, so many undertakings have
fallen by GO1te\'s providence and expired without benefit for them; so
often have they become disgraced these 26 years. And this hope they have
now will fail them to their greatest shame, embarrassment, harm and
ruin, and this will serve to increase the glory of Christ. Their plots
and undertakings will not succeed if we are only thankful and do not
doubt in this child and son that he is born and given to us as king and
light. If we firmly place our hope and trust in him, there will be no
danger, even when the greatest danger seems to be ahead of us. If we
have to suffer, even if they should kill us and take us out of the way,
what is more? they will not snatch away this light, Christ, from us,
they will not take away the rays of the gospel. Their hope will deceive
them, their plan will be thwarted, even if far more devils pursue us
with their scales; yes, we will not be afraid, even if the world would
perish and the mountains would sink into the sea \[Ps. 46:3\]. For
\"unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given\"; he is our
confidence and strength, and our helper in trouble, in whose light and
brightness we delight, knowing assuredly that he has prepared for us a
kingdom in which we shall enjoy peace, righteousness, life and eternal
bliss 2c.

68 Thus the kingdom of Christ has at all times, especially when the
voice of the gospel resounds, its enemies who oppose it.

1\) This number \"26\" agrees again with the time determination given by
us: 17-1-26-43. Compare the note Col. 112.

They argue about it most vehemently. However, even if they oppose it
with united forces, attacks, and with all their might, they cannot
overthrow it. So far, the Roman emperors and popes, who were well
equipped with power and cunning, have tried in vain. The Turk, the enemy
of the Christian name, so powerful and so denied, tried it for so many
hundred years, but in vain. In sum, as many of them as wanted to destroy
the gospel, they were not able to do so, so that even the worst enemies
of the Christian name had to tolerate the Christians in their lands. As
nowadays many in Turkey, many in other kings, princes and bishops, who
are the worst enemies of the gospel, I do not want to say countries, but
also stay in their courts. Where does this come from? Because the
prophet says here: \"You make many of the Gentiles\" 2c.

For some years now, as I have said, our adversaries have also hoped, and
still hope, that we will soon be suppressed, and wish nothing more than
this. If they suspect the Emperor\'s arrival, or have him present in
Germany, dear God! how they rejoice, how they exult, how great hope they
make for our ruin and downfall. Now, now, they cry, the emperor will
suppress the heretics; now, at last, their end is at hand. This is the
hope they always have, and they ask diligently and fervently for our
downfall, and they are intent on our ruin with all their might. But as
their hope has often failed them, so it will also fail them in the
future, and their plots and undertakings will make a bad progress. They
will never extinguish this light, they will never overthrow this
kingdom. Why? Isaiah tells us: \"You make many things for the Gentiles.

\(70\) The adversaries seek to deter us from the pure preaching of the
Word that we have begun, crying out with a terrible voice that we are
bad boys, rebels, and stiff-necked, that we have undertaken to teach the
gospel, the true

124336-338 . broader explanation of Isa. 9, 3. W. vi, i-n-iW. 125

They think that without their approval nothing should have been taught
or done against the antichrist, the pope, against his ungodly, evil and
worthless decrees. They think that without their approval nothing should
have been taught or done against the Antichrist, the pope, against his
ungodly, evil and worthless decrees, against the idolatrous invocation
of the saints 2c. So also among the Jews it was considered a terrible
wrong and a great crime that Christ and the apostles taught against
circumcision, against the law, against the temple and the holy place,
without asking Caiphas and Annas for advice, as we see in the fifth
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles \[v. 28\] and elsewhere manifoldly.
Thus, since they have this reputation, the papists also demand and
desire that we should humbly fall at their feet and say: Most holy and
venerable fathers and lords in Christ, what do you want us to teach? For
we will not undertake to teach anything except what you command and
approve with your authority.

71 But Christ will not be subdued to these, but saith, Go ye, teach;
spread these rays and my light among the Jews and Gentiles. Do not let
this make them angry and rage. Therefore, just as Christ and the
apostles preached and prayed, so let us also preach and pray, and let
nothing that they do against us and against the kingdom of Christ
trouble us. If we carry out our ministry diligently, there is no danger;
then let us see what they will or can do against us, and whether they
will extinguish this light. It is true that this light will arouse a
terrible anger and fury of the devil and of the scales that cling to the
devil, that is, his ungodly limbs; but however much they rage and rage,
and try everything against us, they will not be able to do anything,
they will never extinguish this light.

Seventy-two: This is what the prophet means when he says, \"You make
much of the nations, but you do not make much of the pleasures. As if to
say, \"You will not listen to me, you will reject me, you will despise
my light; but you will do this to your great harm.

Nevertheless, although a large portion will reject the grace offered,
some of the Jews and many of the unholy Gentiles will be converted; a
great multitude will be gathered.

73\. But by whom will they be converted? Who is the one who will make so
much of the Gentiles? Certainly the king, my cousin and brother. For he
calls him his cousin in the fifth chapter, v. 1. There is indeed a great
familiarity between this king and the prophet Isaiah. For he speaks very
familiarly with this king. What are you going to do? What do you oppose,
my dear cousin, my dear brother, when your light will rise in the world?
Is this why your light rises and shines in the world, so that you can
make a lot of people happy? But by this very thing you will cause great
trouble. You will cause a great defeat. You will make many things for
the Gentiles, but you will not make many things for the joyful ones.

Why will you not make much of the joys? Because you will cause terrible
wrath among those who are God\'s people and come from the seed of the
holy fathers, because they will be angry that you are making much of the
Gentiles. If you were to bring and gather a few from the Gentiles, who
could quickly destroy and exterminate them, they would not be so angry
and wicked. But that you make so many of the Gentiles, that you draw so
many thousands of Gentiles to yourself by your light, that you make so
great a multitude, which cannot be exterminated, subject to you, that
this light is greater than they can prevent and exterminate, that is
what will bite them, that will make them furious. That will disturb all
joy, that will make them very angry. As great as your light will be, so
great will be their anger, their rage and disgust. He speaks, as I said,
of this so important matter with very low and contemptuous words, which
mean more than they say, just as we Germans say: I bring him news that
will not be pleasant to him and will give him little joy. I will prepare
a banquet for him, but he will not go away from it very happy, and at
which he will not feast very happily. Therefore

126 **L. XXUI, 338-340.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI,
lW-198.** 127

he happily boasts that this light will be much. As if to say: Therefore
I thank my God that this light will be so great; but I do not know what
will happen. When this light will have risen, it will blind the eyes and
bring darkness upon the eyes of my Jews.

This is also the case now with our papists, who are no less angry than
the Jews at this light, and are enraged and embittered by it. And it
serves them right. Are they not worthy of it before others, since they
are so angry and blinded by the light by which they should be
enlightened, since they fight against their conscience? Why do they
curse this so kind and gracious light, which offers itself to them of
its own free will? They confess that our doctrine is true, that it does
not dispute with the holy Scriptures; and they must confess this,
willingly or unwillingly. We teach the first and other tablets of the
ten commandments, we confess that Christ suffered, was crucified, died,
and was raised from the dead on the third day, 2c., which they
themselves also confess. Why then do they dispute against us, since they
themselves confess that what we teach about Christ is true? Even the
Jews must admit that we teach the ten commandments correctly.

What do they find wrong with us? Why do they persecute us with such
hatred and fury? It happens, as they think, for the sake of important
causes. Dear, what are they? We don\'t keep the essays of the ancients,
we don\'t wash our hands, we don\'t keep the sabbath, we don\'t pluck
ears on the sabbath, that is, we don\'t believe that the pope is the
head of the church, we don\'t cover our heads, we don\'t wear ropes, we
don\'t wear robes, we don\'t wear straps on our feet, we don\'t wear
clogs, we don\'t go barefoot, we don\'t wear albums and surplices, we
don\'t wear coarse cloths 2c. We are condemned because of these so
coarse crimes! But do you ask: What do all these things matter? What is
nothing, that is the most important thing with them; so great is their
blindness, so wrong and so ungodly their judgment. They hear that we
teach the Ten Commandments, they hear that we believe what is written in
them and in the Gospel;

But because we deny that the saints are to be called, because we do not
believe in purgatory, because we consider the plates to be nothing that
God does not demand, because we abhor what God curses in His word,
because we want the prestige and dignity of the divine word to remain
unharmed, because we constantly uphold the honor of God and our Lord
Christ, and protect it against the statutes of men, against the
fictitious and idolatrous services of God, for this reason we are
condemned, proclaimed heretics and rebels.

Thus they fight against the known truth, against the light that shines
so brightly and blinds their eyes with its rays. They condemn us for the
sake of nothing, through no fault of our own. They want us to worship
their zalmaveth, their darkness, their shadows of death, for the true
light that shines to us. But this we will never do. This king, this son,
who sits on the throne of David, this light, this sun we want to
worship, and bravely break through, and drive out their darkness, their
purifications, their plate-shearing 2c. But only try it, you will not
make much of the joys with it; then you will incur danger, for they will
kill you. What is it more? They can suppress me, but they will not
suppress this light.

In the beginning of the evangelical cause, a certain brother from our
order said to me: \"Believe me, my dear brother, it will shame us, and
it will be hard and difficult to confess what you teach, because we are
confessing that we have erred. It will be hard to recant what we have
taught and believed for so many years. This honest man loved the word
with great reverence, and accepted it with joy; but he nevertheless saw
that few would confess their error, because this would be connected with
great difficulty. And now we see that it has come to pass. They will not
confess that they have erred in one syllable, that they have walked in
darkness, and dwelt in the land of the shadow of death.

79\. and yet, nonetheless

128 L- um. 340-342. broader explanation of Isa. 9, 3. W. vi, 198-201.
129

Some pious people who have a good conscience and the hope of eternal
life. These come near, bearing a desire for this King of righteousness.
These, after being converted by the rays of this light, throw away the
bats, the moles, the abominations, the idols of Zalmaveth, the works of
darkness that they worshiped. These works of darkness the adversaries
want us to worship, and that we should worship these abominations; and
since we do not want to do this, since we refuse to obey them in this
matter, they become inhumanly mad and foolish, threatening with pure
murder, and seek to destroy us all with one another.

80 But no matter how much they rage and rage against us, they will never
force us to worship their bats and moles and keep them. The light has
dawned on us, Christ, the true light; we want to keep this light and
remain with it, this we want to accept, this we want to worship and
adore, and not turn away from their anger, rage, fury, blasphemy and
blasphemy; we do not want to be deterred by the danger and persecution
after our lives. We will comfort ourselves with the fact that Christ
said beforehand that they would be angry with us and rage against us as
frenzies, and do everything possible against us for the sake of this
confession.

\(81\) And the prophet says here before that it will be the same with
his wicked and stiff-necked people. And he was not mistaken. For this
circumcised people can bear nothing less 1) than this light, which they
persecute with such great hatred that they curse it to the highest
degree and spit at it in a frightening manner.

Even today the devil is angry with his scales after the gospel shines,
although now only a spark of this light is glimmering. What will happen
then when the sun will rise, when Christ himself will appear? If they
can\'t stand this light, if they go against the rays of the sun, what
will happen?

1\) Instead of this reading of the Erlangen edition, the -lvrttenberger
offers: MUi) 6vim minus ksrrs possuut.

What will happen on that day against the sun itself? How terribly they
will be enraged, when the sun itself will show itself in its complete
clarity and will be seen, when he will speak this judgment in the
judgment \[Matth. 25, 41\]: \"Go away from me, you cursed, into the
eternal fire\" 2c. How great then will be those eternal, abominable,
horrible blasphemies and their wrath!

This is what the prophet says here: \"You make much of the Gentiles\",
but to your people\'s destruction. O Messiah, thou son of David, by this
very thing, that thou shalt make the Gentiles much, because they will
receive the light, by this very thing, I say, thou shalt not make the
pleasures much, that is, thou shalt awaken a great and dreadful sadness,
rage and zeal, by this very thing thou shalt make the devil and his
scales quite furious. This interpretation is not forced. For in this way
the words, the things, and our experience agree with the content.

\(84\) The rabbis here speak useless things, and dream I know not what;
they speak nothing intelligible at all, and say such things as are
farther than heaven and earth from each other, and which do not rhyme at
all with the sense and understanding of the prophet. Therefore, they
should not be followed at all, nor should they be trusted. And I
recommend to the lovers of the Hebrew language that they may be careful
to improve it. The rabbis do not care at all about the context or the
sequence, but they tear it apart and falsify the sayings of the
prophets. As in this place, instead of the adverb of \[not\], they read
the pronoun ei \[the same\], in this way: you make the people much, to
them you make much joy. Thus they wilfully corrupt and falsify the
opinion of the prophet, since neither the matter nor the consequence
coincide.

In short, the prophet wants to say this: The child who was born to us
has made much of the Gentiles, that is, he has gathered a large church
among the Gentiles, or he has called many of the Gentiles to his church.
But with this he did not make much of the joys, that is, this
multiplication, or this multitude of the

**130** L, XXIII, 342-344. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
201-204. **131**

The Gentiles have given cause for your terrible rage, which still
continues with the Jews and will continue forever. For they will kill
this child and persecute the Christian people with terrible cruelty. But
since he says here that there was not much rejoicing, or that his people
had no rejoicing at all over the Christ who was born, what does he want
with what he immediately attaches to it?

**But you will rejoice as one rejoices in the harvest, as one rejoices
in the distribution of the spoils.**

Here the prophet speaks of those who have been converted from the Jews
and Gentiles, not of the blinded and hardened Jews who have rejected the
offered Christ. Therefore he sets here a double kind of people. When he
says, \"You do not make much of joys,\" he means this of the hardened
people of the Jews, who rejected Christ and drew no joy and pleasure at
all from the future of Christ, so that they rather became furious
against Christ and the confessors of the faith in Christ. But when he
says, \"In thy sight shall men rejoice,\" he understands it of those to
whom this light has dawned, who have known and accepted Christ. And he
distinguishes these two joys quite clearly from one another. \"Thou hast
not made much of joy,\" namely, apart from thee, in those who rejected
thee and remained in darkness. But although this joy was not great in
those who were blinded, yet \"before thee\" will rejoice those who
before were in outer darkness, to whom that great light has dawned. For
in this light is the true, highest and only joy, the highest and
infinite pleasure; and therefore he adds: \"Before you\", that is, in
this your light.

He uses two parables to express the greatness of the joy to some extent.
The first is in these words, \"How one rejoices in the harvest,\" the
other in this \[Vulg.\], \"How the victors rejoice over the conquered
spoil, when they distribute the booty.\" And they are very appropriate,
excellent parables. The one belongs to the heap.

or borrowed from the household, the other belonging to secular dealings,
or taken from the secular regiment.

The parables, which are taken from the household, occur frequently with
the prophets. For they often use these and similar words \[Joel I, 10.
11.\]: \"The field stands miserable, the wine stands miserable\" 2c.
When there is a lack of grain, or when the fields seem to be too meager,
and do not yield with a great return what has been entrusted to them,
then the farmers and all people look sad and morose. For our joy and
life is precisely this field or the earth, and the heaven that makes the
earth fertile.

89\. And it is a very honorable, pure and sincere joy, since one
rejoices when the crops are happy and abundant. For we rejoice that we
have been given abundantly by God, so that our family, children 2c. can
be sustained and fed. It is not such joy or pleasure as the shameful and
nasty pleasure of the flesh seeks in debauchery 2c. When the fields give
us good hope, or when the harvest is rich and great, when the fields
have borne abundant fruit, then the hearts of all men and animals
rejoice, then all is exceedingly joyful. Of spring Virgilius says:

Omnia tunc rident, tunc formosissimus annus. 1)\'

\[But this can be said with greater truth of the time of harvest. It is
true that at the beginning of the year, in spring, it is a very joyful
time, for then everything blossoms; but this time does not make fat, it
does not nourish the body, but only feeds the eyes. But without grain
and without wine, that is, if the body does not have its need, if the
stomach is not filled, there is no joy; according to the saying in the
104th Psalm, v. 14, 15: \"You make grass grow for the cattle, and seed
for the use of men, that you may bring forth bread from the earth, and
that wine may give delight to man.

1\) VlrA. Lueoiien, lei. Ill, v. 57: Rune tronUent 8ÜVÄ6, nune
torlnosißsiinus nnnus. The first words: ornnrn rinne riäent are found
iiüä. Lei. Vll, v. 58.

132 L- xxiii, 344-34\". More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 3. W. vi,
201-207. 133

and his form become beautiful with oil, and the bread of man strengthen
his heart. The Germans say, \"It is evil to sing and dance with a hungry
belly\"; that is, when the stomach is sober and the intestines make a
noise from hunger, one cannot sing a merry song, and no one dances when
he is sober. With these and similar words they imply that the merriment
of the body is based in good part on food and drink.

90 Therefore this simile, which is taken from the household, is very
beautiful, and is very appropriate here. For when the harvest is rich,
when the crops are not in short supply, when the barns cannot hold the
blessings of the harvest, when the house, the cellar and all the
storehouses are filled, when everything is plentiful and in abundance
with which we nourish and sustain our bodies, then people become
extraordinarily and exceedingly happy. That is why they say: A good
harvest, fine grain, a rich and fat autumn make people happy.

91\) It should also be noted that this similitude, which is taken from
the harvest, is not yet the thing itself, just as the word we speak is
only a sign, but we expect the thing that is promised in the word. Thus,
the joy that a good and abundant harvest produces is a picture of the
true, eternal and spiritual joy, which cannot be better depicted than by
this similitude.

The other simile is taken from worldly affairs, from victory in war. For
even a victorious people rejoices greatly over the victory it has
obtained over the defeated enemies, and this joy is also thorough; for
when the enemy is overcome and suppressed, the dear and exceedingly
pleasant peace is restored. The harvest is a joy in the household; the
victory over enemies who severely threatened nns is joy in the worldly
regiment. Both the joy that comes from the harvest and the joy that
comes from the victory are extraordinary and very great joys. When peace
ceases and war rages, the appearance of all men, land and animals is a
sad one. But when the enemy is defeated, and victory is won, and peace
is restored, there is laughter, there is skipping.

Everyone\'s spirits are lifted, all sadness is forgotten, songs of
triumph and thanksgiving are sung.

Undique tunc felix niveis et alacribus alis Laetitia exultans gestit,
luditque per omnes Vicos atque domos, celebrantur gaudia ubique, -
Jubila tolluntur toto resonantia coelo.

Everywhere, then, the frellde leaps with white and swift wings, jailling
with happiness, and plays its game in all villages and houses;
everywhere, joyful festivals are celebrated, and rejoicing arises, which
echoes under the whole sky\]. These are the right and proper pleasures
of the flesh, and they are far greater than the nasty and beastly
pleasures of the flesh and pleasure.

All histories are full of victories and testimonies of joy that follow
victories. As great as the danger in war is (but the danger in time of
war is always very near, and very great, in that we are not safe for a
moment of our lives, and all our possessions, wife and children are in
the same danger with us), so great is the joy when the enemies are
beaten and put to flight, when the dear peace is restored. Then one
sings with a joyful heart: \"The rope is broken and we are free\", Ps.
124, 7.

\(94\) By these two parables, then, the prophet intended to express and
indicate the exquisite, thorough, and exceedingly great joy. For a
blessed harvest and a thorough peace, which one has attained after the
enemies have been completely defeated, are two exceedingly great and
inestimable treasures, which protect this life, and without which life
is not only not pleasant, but also cannot exist in any way. Now, as
pleasant as life itself is, so are food for life and peace, because if
we are deprived of these, we are immediately threatened with mortal
danger. For hunger and the sword spoil, devastate, destroy and consume
everything 2c. When that which belongs to the nourishment of the body is
superfluous, when the blessing of the harvest is abundant, and when,
after the war is eliminated and the enemy is defeated, peace is again
established, then everything resounds with joy.

134 **XXIII, 346-349. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 207-209.**
135

Tunc juvenes blanda modulantur carmina voce. Gaudia testantur Cytharae
festiva sonantes, Et clare resonant plectra canora lyrae. Plurima
sublata tolluntur jubila dextra, Jubila justitiae non habitura modum. 1)
\[Then the young men sing songs with a sweet voice. The sounding cithers
testify to the festive joy, and the melodious melodies of the bright
lutes resound. From all throats there rises a shout of jubilation with
uplifted right hand, a jubilation that cannot keep the right measure\].
Therefore, in these two parables, the highest and greatest joy is
indicated and pictured by the prophet. But where is this so great joy?

**In front of you.**

95 Furthermore, he does not express the equality of victory in one word
alone. He does not say, \"As the victors rejoice,\" but adds, \"As the
victors rejoice over the spoils they have taken, when they divide the
spoils. We divide our spoils according to our way, that is, we rejoice
and are glad in spirit, not over a rich bodily harvest, not over a
worldly victory, nor over a spoil snatched from a conquered enemy, but
over the victory, and over the distribution of the spoil acquired and
given to us through this born child. Therefore, our joy and gladness is
not like the joy and gladness of those who rejoice in the bodily harvest
and in a bodily victory, but, as the prophet says, \"in thy sight\" is
this our true joy, that is, in thy light. There is the full and eternal
harvest, there is the most sure victory, there is in truth the rich
spoil taken, there we shall be satiated and made drunk with the riches
of thy house, there we shall sing for ever as those who drink wine sing;
there our mouth shall be full of laughter, and our tongue full of
boasting; there all shall be full of gladness and rejoicing forever.

This joy is spiritual, and this harvest is eternal, as long as the
gospel shines and the wheat is gathered into the sheds. This is where
this joy begins, but in the future it will be a joy.

1\) These verses are missing from the Wittenberg edition.

It will be completed in the next life. There we will finally enjoy the
abundance of all things, there we will defeat the enemy, there we will
have true peace, not such a peace as the world gives, but which the
child born to us, the Son given to us, has acquired for us, as he says
elsewhere, John 16:33: \"In me you have peace. This peace is quite
different, far greater, more thorough, and more excellent, than any
peace and joy of the world; but it has been somewhat indicated by that
temporal joy which men feel at the time of peace obtained after war, and
at the time of a rich and superfluous harvest.

97\) Now the prophet shows who these enemies are, after whose defeat and
overcoming this child, this king of eternal peace and eternal
righteousness, has achieved such an excellent and glorious victory, and
has carried off such rich spoils; not for himself, but for his people,
who have been enlightened by this great light, therefore they also
rejoice and are glad. The words of the prophet are thus:

**V. 4 For thou hast broken the yoke of their burden, and the rod of
their shoulder, and the staff of their driver, as in the days of
Midian.**

Death, sin and the law are our enemies and tyrants, who rage against us
and rule over us with full right and supreme power. These are described
by St. Paul 1 Cor. 15, 56. when he says: \"The sting of death is sin;
but the power of sin is the law.\" These very powerful and cruel enemies
rage against all the descendants of Adam, and devour the whole human
race. There is no counsel or help against their exceedingly cruel
tyranny, neither from men nor from angels. How then shall we be
delivered from their right and from their power which they have over us?
Listen to the prophet here; he sings joyfully that these tyrants, who
are not only terrifying to the whole world, but are a poison and
pestilence to the whole human race, have been thrown to the ground and
destroyed by the child born to us and by the Son given to us with these

136 **xxm, 34S-söi.** More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 4. **W. vi,
209-212.** 137

words: \"You have broken the yoke of their burden, and the rod of their
shoulder, and the rod of their driver, as in the days of Midian.\" As if
to say, \"O King of peace, righteousness and everlasting life, the joy
of your people, on whom your light shines, is great and inexpressible.
Why? Because you have overcome or broken the yoke of their burden, and
the rod of their shoulder, and the rod of their driver.

With these words, Isaiah describes death, sin and the law, our most
cruel enemies and tyrants, who, as I have said, rule over us, keeping us
imprisoned and in a very miserable bondage, without any hope of
deliverance. The law convicts us that we are sinners, it terrifies our
hearts. After sin has been aroused and shown by the law, man immediately
pronounces the sentence of death against himself: You have sinned,
therefore you are guilty of eternal damnation. Thus death has the right
to sting and kill us with its sting, namely through sin, which the law,
the power of sin, arouses and shows.

100\. Against this exceedingly hard captivity and bondage of the law, of
sin, of death, by which we are oppressed, there is no remedy nor
consolation in all the world, unless one grasps in faith these and
similar sermons of the prophets and apostles, such as that is in this
passage of Isaiah: \"Thou hast broken the yoke of their burden, and the
rod of their shoulder, and the rod of their driver.\" Likewise, \"A
child is born to us, and a son is given to us.\" He comforts us and
gives us hope for all good things, and says John 16:33: \"Be of good
cheer! I have overcome the world\"; likewise: \"In me you have peace\"
2c. When death, sin, and the law hear this child mentioned in faith,
they are immediately terrified and flee, because they cannot bear to
hear him mentioned. For the law, sin, death have accused him, condemned
him, brought him to the cross and killed him, but innocently. Therefore
they have offended this Sun of Righteousness, who did no sin, but is the
truth, the righteousness, and the life; of whom the law, the sin, and
the death have accused, condemned, crucified, and killed him, but
innocently.

They had no right to accuse, condemn and kill him. But because he
allowed himself to be condemned and killed by them, he did this for our
sake, and by this he has done enough for the sins of the whole world.

101 As many of them as believe in this child, in this Son, their sins
are forgiven them, and those that remain in the flesh are not imputed to
them because of faith in him. But to whom sin is forgiven, death has no
right, for it too has been swallowed up through this child for eternity.
But after sin and death are forgiven, the law finds nothing to accuse
and condemn.

\(102\) Even though death is a heavy yoke and burden, sin a very sharp
rod of the shoulder, the law a harsh and merciless driver, the people of
this child and king have no cause to fear, but rather to rejoice, to be
of good cheer and secure. For the child who is born to us has overcome
these tyrants and so weakened their power that they no longer have any
right over his people, who walk in the light. Yes, it can mock with
Paulo with the highest joy of its enemies now: \"Hell, 1) where is your
victory? Death, where is thy sting?\" \[1 Cor. 15:55\], and with certain
faith, as Paul says elsewhere \[Rom. 8:3\], that sin is condemned by
sin, that the handwriting which was against us, which came into being by
statutes, and was opposed to us, is done out of the means, and pinned to
the cross \[Col. 2. 14.\] That Christ had taken away the power of death,
and had brought life and an incorruptible nature to light, 2 Tim. 1, 10.
And this he does without ceasing to all the godly, during the whole time
of their life and until the end of the world, until death will finally
cease and be completely taken away.

But in what way does he do this? Through the Gospel and the Sacraments,
through which he works the greatest miracles unceasingly. He kindles his
light in our hearts, he brings with him the greatest joy, in which we
rejoice over our own sins.

1\) In the editions: mors.

138 L. XXIII, 351-353. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 212-215.
139

We can rejoice over our enemies and cheerfully distribute our booty,
knowing that we will triumph over Satan, over death, over sin. 2c.
Likewise, through the gospel, he not only calls the Gentiles, who were
under the dominion of death and the devil, to grace, but from these same
Gentiles he chooses for and for innumerable ministers of this grace, who
teach others and deliver them from death, law and the kingdom of Satan.
For those to whom the ministry of the word is entrusted save men from
the power of Satan, from death, from sin 2c. But those who are delivered
from these very powerful and cruel enemies must necessarily rejoice to
the fullest.

This joy this child works and brings about through the ministry of his
word and the sacraments, especially in those who have tasted the horrors
of death, who have felt what it is to bear the yoke of burden, that is,
not to be safe for a moment, to be always pale at the mention of death,
and to tremble in terror before it, and yet see no escape anywhere.
Certainly, this burden is the heaviest of all burdens, insufferable and
unbearable; but it is taken away by the good deed and merit of this Son
who is given to us; that is, death itself, as the punishment of sin, is
destroyed and cast down.

**The ruthe of her shoulder.**

Sin drove and weighed down this burden, or gave strength to this burden.
For sin is the sting of death and its scourge. When man truly feels sin,
then he flees and is terrified of death and hell, then he can think and
conclude nothing else but this: You have sinned, therefore you must die.
For sin brings death as the punishment. Now this burden, and the rod
that lies on his shoulders, and this spur and lash, wakes up the ass,
and drives and stirs him about; that is, when he truly feels sin, it
weighs him down to such an extent that he does not know where to turn,
and he sees that he must die and perish. I

Against this sting of death there is no other counsel nor remedy than
that which the prophet shows here, namely, that Christ, the Son of God,
has blunted this sharpness of the sting of death, that is, has condemned
sin. This I have treated elsewhere more extensively; therefore, I now
only pass over it above.

The third enemy is \"the driver\'s stick\", namely the law, \"the rider
who has the stick in his hand\". The rider, who sits on the horse, and
holds a stick or whip in his hand, and rules and forces the horse, is
the law. If the law were not, if this did not accuse, the sin would not
be, the driver would not drive. If sin were not, the burden did not
press us. The law is on our necks, it presses our shoulders, it drives
us, it puts the burden on us, it stings and drives us with its scepter
or rod, that is, with sin. It commands us to fulfill the commandments of
God; if we cannot do what it commands us to do, it stabs and pierces us
with its scepter, saying: You must die. For \"cursed is every man that
continueth not in all these things\" 2c. s5 Mos. 27, 26. Gal. 3, 10.\]
The prophet and Paul have well understood what the law is. The prophet
says exactly what Paul says, that the law is the power of sin, 1 Cor.
15, 56.

\(107\) When the gospel began, when our adversaries heard that we taught
that the law was the power of sin, they almost became furious and
blasphemed us terribly because we taught this. But they do not see that
this is Paul\'s teaching. Nor does reason understand how the law is the
power of sin. For according to its natural enlightenment it judges so:
The law is a doctrine which enjoins what is good and honorable, and
forbids what is evil and shameful; therefore it is certainly good and
holy, therefore it is not the power of sin, but the power of
righteousness. Therefore, Paul is the greatest heretic who dares to
speak blasphemously against heaven, against God, and to say that the law
is the power of sin, that is, that it increases sin, that it strengthens
it, and that it is the power of righteousness.

140 **L- XXIII, 353-355.** more extensive explanation of **Isa. 9, 4. W.
VI, 215-217.** 141

strengthen. Therefore, when reason hears that the law is the power of
sin, it cannot suffer it in any way. For it is convinced that it
invalidates, abolishes and destroys sin, that it is a force of
righteousness; therefore it considers this teaching of Paul to be
blasphemy.

It took us much and great work to understand this and similar texts in
the prophets and in Paul. The church fathers are silent and say
inconsistent things, yes, they obscure such scriptural passages
altogether.

But how the law is the power of sin, how sin is increased and
strengthened by the law, this must be learned not from reason, but from
Paul and his epistles to the Galatians and to the Romans in the fourth
chapter, where he says, v. 15, \"The law causes wrath,\" and is the
power of sin \[1 Cor. 15:56\]. Not that it incites and compels to sin,
but because it makes sin exceedingly sinful, that is, makes us realize
how grievous and terrible sin is. It shows sin, but does not abolish it.
It says and commands what one should do, namely, one must love God with
all one\'s heart, and one\'s neighbor as oneself 2c.; but it does not
provide any strength, it does not help me to fulfill what it commands.
It demands such things from me that are impossible for human nature. For
nature cannot out of its powers love God with all its heart and its
neighbor as itself. But the more I understand and feel the impossibility
of nature, the more and stronger I feel the sin, or the heavier the sin
becomes.

It is through God\'s special goodness that no one understands and feels
in the highest degree, completely and perfectly, what sin and the power
of the Law are. If man\'s conscience truly touched and worried him, if
he truly felt the gravity and greatness of his sins, he would not be
able to live long if he did not die suddenly. The more clearly and the
more sin is understood and recognized, the stronger, heavier, more
frightening and cruel it becomes.

1\) In Latin: Koni. 7.

it is, and becomes heavier and heavier until it finally kills.

Thus the driver, that is the law, incites and drives sin; sin drives and
brings death; death and the terrors of death kill man. Therefore, many
have been, and still are, who, when they truly felt sin, could not be
comforted, and fell into despair, because they did not have this child
that is born to us, and this Son that is given to us.

Consider and see the whole condition of the churches under the papacy,
whether those who have truly felt the burden of sin have not all met the
law in one and the same way? whether they have not all endeavored to do
enough for sin by their good works, and dreamed that they would do
enough for it? But they did nothing at all, so that the more sour they
let it become, the heavier this driver pressed them. This is what
happened to me under the papacy. I held daily masses, and in each mass I
called on three patron saints, I weighed down my body with fasting and
vigils, and thought that in this way I would do enough for the law, and
pacify my conscience before the driver\'s sting. But I achieved nothing;
the further I went on these ways, the more I was frightened, so much so
that I would have fallen into despair if Christ had not graciously
looked upon me and enlightened me with the light of his gospel.
Therefore I can credibly testify what an evil conscience is, and what
this driver, the law, can do in the conscience. For I have partly
experienced it myself; then I have also seen and heard some who were
tormented and martyred in the most miserable way by the sensation of
sin. Gerson writes that many who felt the burden of the law and sin
imagined that they were \[chickens, and\] clucked like hens, or crowed
like roosters. 2) What need is there of much words? A wicked ge-

2\) Cf. Tischreden, Cap. 26, § 52, Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII,
814. According to this, this passage is to be understood, but not, as
the old translator has it: \"that they seemed to him to be gersous, as
if they were gurgling like chickens, or crowing like roosters. The
meaning is simple: they have become insane by the unbearable burden of
the law.

142 L. XXIII, 355-357. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 217-220.
143

know is hell. That makes the stick of the driver, the law. If this
driver presses the human being, if he strikes and drives with his stick
and whip, then nothing healthy remains in the flesh and in the bones.
The soul or conscience is tormented as if it were in hell; David is
witness to this, Ps. 6:6.

Nevertheless, the law is good, Romans 7:12, but because it is good, it
strengthens and increases sin; not that it increases it in number
(although it does), but rather that it increases its power. The law
blows into the fire, and when the fire has already subsided, it blows on
it again, igniting and flaming the coals. And as the fire grows the more
fuel is added, and the more one blows into it, so also the law: the more
it is recognized, the more fiercely it drives us, the more heavily the
sensation of sin presses and frightens us, and blows into the fire in
such a way that it makes the fiery coals burn all the way to hell.

But that the prophet calls the law a \"rod of the driver\", and Paul
\"the power of sin\" \[1 Cor. 15, 56.\], and its office \"an office of
death and damnation\" \[2 Cor. 3, 9.\], this must not be taken from
human or worldly legal laws. These are not juridical and human things. A
jurist must not say that human laws increase sin; this is only true in
true and high theology, where one knows what is conscience, what is law,
what is sin, what is death.

In this passage, the law is called a tyrant and a driver. However, it is
a tyrant and driver not through its guilt, but through ours. For we are
conceived and born in sins, and live in sins; but the law kindles sin,
and through sin it kindles hell, and makes it burn, that is, it makes
sin exceedingly sinful, Rom. 7:13, and though sin be small, yet it
becomes very dreadful, grievous, and great, when the law blows into it
and makes it great. The more sin is recognized, the more it torments us.
Thus, a man who kills pales, and the more he recognizes the greatness of
his deed, the more he is tormented.

and realizes, the more he pales. Thus the law increases all sins by
leading us to a more accurate knowledge of them. However, it cannot be
otherwise than that man becomes afraid when he has seen the shamefulness
and seriousness of sins more closely and more exactly, and has
recognized the righteous wrath of God against sin.

Thus the law becomes our executioner, our driver, our tyrant, but only
for a time, not forever. For the prophet says, \"You have broken the rod
of the driver.\" The law is now abolished by Christ, but not with all,
only with the people who see the light. This people has been freed from
the three cruelest tyrants, sin, death and the law, through Christ, the
conqueror of these enemies.

\(117\) But this, that the law is abolished, must not be understood as
if nothing more had to be done according to the moral law, as if we were
now without law, and could live according to our own pleasure, and
freely indulge our lusts. Let this be far from us. But the law is
abolished in our hearts, so that it may not accuse us, so that it may
not continue to be a force for sin. For if the law is burdensome to me,
I can now say, Seize thee, O woman of the law, with the sting of thy
driving; to them that dwell in darkness a great light has dawned.
Likewise, \"A child is born to us, a son is given to us.\" By this the
power of sin is taken from thee, that thou mayest not further trouble
and accuse my conscience.

St. Paul read this prophet diligently and held it in high esteem. For he
portrays death, sin and the law in just this way, mocks them, rejoices
in the spirit, and calls us all to rejoice in the Lord as the conqueror
of these enemies. And why should not the godly rejoice, why should they
not leap and skip, since they hand out such rich spoils? since the
devil, the author of sin and death, the law, the driver\'s rod, Moses,
the servant of death, since these tyrants, I say, have been overcome by
this child? What Satan had stolen, this child has restored to us by
overcoming Satan. This child

144 L. xxiii, 3S7-3S9. More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 4. W. vi,
220-223. 145

is the strong one who came over the strong one, overcame him and took
away all his armor, on which he relied and his robbery \[Luc. 11, 22\].

This child, through his servants here on earth, takes and snatches from
the hands and power of the devil those who are imprisoned and afflicted
by death, sin, and the accusation of the law. When his servants say: I
baptize you, or: I absolve you in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit 2c., they make people fearless and sure that
they do not fear anything from death, sin and the accusation of the law.
These straighten the frightened hearts and strengthen them when they
proclaim this deliverance and salvation through this child who is born
to us and through this Son who is given to us.

This is the victory through which peace is acquired. Peter also wishes
this peace to those who were chosen according to the providence of God
the Father, right at the beginning of his first epistle, where he says:
\"God give you much grace and peace! \[1 Petr. I, 2.\] This is the true
and thorough joy that has been brought to us by the victory of this
infant. And this joy the godly feel daily in their hearts, and the Holy
Spirit works the same on earth in His Church through our hands and
tongues. Our hands and tongues are indeed perishable and mortal things,
but through these means, through these perishable and earthly vessels,
the Son of God wants to prove His power. \"We have this divine treasure
in earthly vessels, that the abundant power may be of GOD\" \[2 Cor. 4,
7.\].

The Hebrew word that the Latin interpreter has given by superasti \[you
have overcome\] is actually translated fregisti \[you have broken\],
especially when it refers to the mind. For a broken mind is called such
a mind that is depressed, despondent, fearful, frightened, set in fear
and trembling. So actually the Hebrew word here means to break or to
deter and to hold off by fright. And in this way it is often used in the
Scriptures. But the prophet wants to indicate with it that God is not
afraid of a

He uses a completely different means than the world to frighten these
enemies of whom the prophet speaks here, to put them to flight and to
throw them to the ground. He uses no sword, no carnal power, no weapons,
he does not let wrath and a passionate heart take the reins, 1) but uses
only a mere terror (as he scared the Midianites), or he frightens them
off, and stops them from their scheming and plotting, and says: Let go,
stop, make an end. With such a weak arm (as they say) he confronts his
enemies, and so easily can he repulse them with a word, destroy their
forces and undertakings, and discourage them from their schemes and
intentions. He destroys even the most fierce and cruel attack of death,
sin, law and Satan with only one word. He does not need force for this,
but if he only lifts a finger or waves a finger, he frightens and deters
the enemies so that they do not do anything cruel or harsh against us,
and only commands them to desist from their intention. 2c.

But how does this work? How should such great enemies be deterred and
their undertakings hindered by such a slight impulse, and without any
emphasis behind it? They are, I confess, very great enemies; they
undertake terrible things, and they exert all their forces to our
destruction, but this child can frighten and cut them down with easy
effort. For even if they press you to the utmost, if they torment your
troubled conscience and assail you most vehemently, then go without
delay to an ecclesiastic, or to a godly brother, and ask him for
absolution and consolation. When the minister or the brother lays his
hand on thee and says: I absolve thee 2c., then at this word (if thou
believest) the law, sin and death flee away immediately. Thus, by the
mere terror of a weak hand and tongue, these cruel enemies are
frightened and forced to yield. For if you think about the sins

1\) The words: nori laxutis iraennäins impotsntisHus animi Unvsnis are
missing in the Wittenberg edition.

146 L. xxiii, 3SS-361. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 223-226.
147

If you have true repentance and sorrow, and believe that Christ has done
enough for them by his death, and ask for absolution, you will be truly
absolved of your sins, and you will then have nothing to fear, neither
from death, nor from the law, nor from Satan.

Is this not by far the greatest and most marvelous thing, that by such a
small impulse, so easily, at the mere laying on of hands and the
speaking or sound of a human voice, Satan takes flight, that sin, which
threatens us with death, must despair, and that the law and the
conscience are compelled to put an end to the terror and torment? Is not
this a marvelous way to govern, that a child should destroy and hinder
the attacks and ravings of such terrifying enemies with such ease and in
a moment, and terrify them? Are not these great and by far the greatest
works, that this child can so terrify the devil that he must flee when
he hears but one word? This word is the so great power, before which the
power of the law, and even the wrath of God flees. So great is the
power, so great is the power of this child, who is true man, but also
true God. Now if you believe, the movement of a weak finger and tongue,
or the voice with which I absolve you, can make your heart come alive.
When I say: Be of good cheer, my son, your sins are forgiven:
immediately death dies on this word, sin is destroyed and cancelled,
Satan is frightened and put to flight.

It is an admirable and astonishing thing that the oral word of a man can
do such great things, that the hand of a brother or priest, and the
absolution is of such great power that it destroys this greatest and
most violent attack of such great and terrifying enemies. Therefore also
those in the Gospel praise this unspeakable gift, this wonderful and
infinite power, gloriously and with full mouth, and praise GOD who has
given such power to men \[Matth. 9, 8.\]. These are the greatest and
infinite benefits of God towards the human race. Therefore

Let us be thankful and righteous for this, praising the works and
benefits of this child, gladly hearing this word of life, righteousness,
and peace, so that we may have comfort and strength against the terror
of death and sin, and against the sadness of the spirit.

\(125\) When we do this, it certainly cannot be otherwise than that we
burst into infinite and unbelievable joy, since so excellent a victory
has been won for us, and since we are distributing such rich spoils,
after such great enemies have been put to flight, defeated, and thrown
down, as there are, the sting of death, the law that increases sin;
after the devil, sin, is done away with, death is killed and destroyed.
\"This may be called a little child and the Lord.\" This wonderful child
is the Lord of great power, who works such and such great things only
through the word spoken by men. Through men these words are spoken, but
they are not the works of man, but of God.

Therefore, this born child must be God. For these are not the works of
men, by the movement of a finger, and by a little sound of the tongue,
to put death to death, to abolish sin, to banish and abolish the law, to
overcome the power of Satan, and to frighten and terrify him, so that
when he hears even one word, he is forced to flee. Since this child does
such great things, it is certain that he is the real true God, and one
God with the Father and the Holy Spirit. The prophet has summarized
these exceedingly great things in such short words. And he adds:

**As in the time of Midian.**

So far we have heard that the prophet does not speak of any other
victory, nor can it be understood, than the glorious, noble and by far
most glorious victory of this child, who was born to us, and of this
son, who was given to us, namely our Savior Jesus Christ. The Jews, as I
have said, very wretchedly and wickedly dismember, tear apart and
distort this text, turning it on Hezekiah, in whose days

148 **L. XXIII, 361-363.** more extensive explanation of Isa. **9, 4. w.
VI, 226-228.** 149

the people rejoiced over the broken rod of the driver, that is, over the
defeated and put to flight war army of Sanherib. Although it is common
and usual for the prophet to understand \"rod\" or \"stick\" to mean
temporal tyranny; for in this sense he uses this word Cap. 14, 4. 5. of
the king of Babylon, neither the preceding nor the following in any way
allows it to be understood of a physical victory or of this enemy
Sanherib.

The Jews see well that these words, \"Thou makest the Gentiles much, but
thou makest not many pleasures,\" 2c., are contrary to them and their
opinion and dispute; therefore they do not read, \"Thou makest not many
pleasures,\" as they stand in the Hebrew, but they distort the text, and
instead of *non \[*not\] read thus, \"Thou makest the people much, and
makest them many pleasures. 1) This is an ungodly and wicked audacity,
when one twists the words of the holy Scriptures out of his own brain
according to his own liking, and invents such an opinion for himself,
which agrees with the dream of our head; as happens in these words: You
make the people much, and give them much joy. This they explain in such
a way that nobody had been who had not rejoiced extraordinarily and even
very much. But, explaining it in this way, the greatest violence happens
to the words of the prophet. For it cannot be understood otherwise than
of the great light, and of the child that is born unto us, and of the
Son that is given unto us.

129 Further, that he adds, \"As in the days of Midian,\" is another
similitude. The story is known, which is written about the famous
commander Gideon, who defeated the Midianites, Amalekites and Arabs, the
peoples who lived in the east and south, whose number was like the sand
of the sea. For so reads the text \[Judges 7:12 ff\]: \"The Midianites
and the Amalekites, and all of the east country, had lich laid down at
the bottom, like a multitude of

1\) Compare § 84. Instead of x\'8 in the text, the Jews read the keri
i8.

Locusts, and their cameos were not to be numbered before the multitude,
as the sand upon the seashore.\" Such a great multitude Gideon slew by
no sword, by no weapons 2c. Therefore, it can be seen from this that the
prophet is speaking of a war other than a physical war, and of a victory
other than that brought about by one of their kings. So he speaks of a
victory similar to the victory obtained over the Midianites. Gideon
attacked such a great multitude with three hundred men; for history
\[Judges 8:10\] testifies that an hundred and twenty thousand enemies
fell. And this so very great multitude he met in the greatest weakness.
For he did nothing more than give each of his three hundred men who went
with him against the enemy a trumpet in his right hand and a jar in his
left, and torches to hold in the jars.

Truly, a strange war, a war without a sword. In the left one holds a
miserable and fragile shard, and this must serve instead of the shield.
The trumpet in the right is instead of the sword. Dear, what kind of war
and meeting will this be, since one fights with such fragile weapons
against such a large number of powerful and so fierce enemies? Those
three hundred men of Gideon must have been gifted with an excellent
spirit and very great faith that, when God calls them, they go against
such a great army with such poor armor, with broken pieces and trumpets.
What could they possibly accomplish with these wretched and fragile
swords and weapons? If they should have fought against stubble 2) or
flies, they would have been sufficiently armed. But what is more
ridiculous to reason, what is more foolish, than to advance against such
a great army of war, which was best equipped with all kinds of
projectiles and weapons, with such ridiculous, such weak, such fragile
and no weapons at all? But God used to arm his men of war in this way,
and even though they were armed in a ridiculous and foolish way, they
were still able to fight in such a way.

2\) In the Wittenberg after LtiprUas is still the word tipulas.

150 D- xxiii, 3K3-365. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 228-231.
151

They were able to beat an uncountable number of enemies with these
weapons and to throw them over the heap. How these jars were prepared
and what shape they had, I can not imagine. The text shows that fire was
enclosed in them, which burst forth after the jars or pots were smashed
or broken. How they made them, whether they were covered with pitch or
some other material, I do not know.

131 So these three hundred men, divided into three battle ranks, did as
Gideon had commanded them, that is, standing every man in his place
round about the camp, blowing with trumpets, and breaking the pitchers,
and after they had broken them, holding in their left hand the burning
torches which were shut up in the pitchers, and in their right hand the
sounding trumpets, and crying out: When the enemies heard the sound of
the three hundred trumpets, which was great and terrible, and when they
saw a great light in the night, which the three hundred torches made
(for all this happened at night), they were suddenly terrified. And
although it was nothing but a sound and a light, yet it aroused this
thought in them, that they thought that the whole kingdom of the
Egyptians, and a multitude of innumerable other nations, had gathered
together and were fighting against them, and this they could in no way
resist. For since so many trumpets made a very great and terrifying
noise, they also frightened them very much. Also the so many lamps or
torches made everything bright with their large shine around. By this
stratagem (which God Himself indicated), the enemies became dismayed and
despondent, and did not think otherwise than that death was now
inescapably ahead of them, and as if they were in extreme danger of
death, and that there was no other advice than that they should take
flight. As they thus took flight, and each, wishing to save his life,
endeavored to break through by force and flee, they all got into a
scramble, slaughtered and hacked each other to pieces, and thus wore
themselves out. For

because their neighbor stood in their way, so that they could not flee
as quickly as they would have liked, the one who followed stabbed the
one in front to save his life. So the enemies were frightened by the
fear that God put in them, and wounded themselves among themselves, and
wore themselves out. The three hundred men whom Gideon led did not draw
a sword; indeed, they did nothing more than stand in their places, as I
have said, holding a burning torch in their left hand and a trumpet in
their right, with which they made a noise.

132 This story praises Isaiah here. 1) David also praises it in the 72nd
Psalm, v. 6, where he prophesies of the Messiah and says: \"He will
descend like the rain on the skin, like the drops that wet the land. For
Gideon asked for this sign, that the dew would be on the hide alone, and
that it would be dry on all the earth. And again he asked that it would
be dry on the skin alone, and dew on the whole earth \[Judges 6:37,
39\]. The Jews falsify, as everything, so also this passage, and give it
thus: He comes down, as the rain on the shorn, that is, on a shorn or
mown or harvested meadow. But the Hebrew word actually means shearing,
as sheep are sheared at wool shearing. Since this story is praised by
David, and here by Isaiah, we should let it be commanded to us, and it
is very worth reading. For this victory of Gideon is very glorious,
which he carried away over the Midianites, Amalekites and Arabs, who
were very important and powerful enemies, who devastated everything \"as
far as Gaza (as the text \[Judges 6:4\] says), and left nothing left of
food in Israel, neither sheep, nor oxen, nor donkeys. For they came up
with their cattle and their tents, as a great multitude of locusts, that
neither they nor their camels could be numbered; and they fell into the
land, and destroyed it\".

133\. against these three very hostile and very large armies of such
powerful enemies, Gideon likewise ordered three bands, or

1\) In the Latin editions: Lrieokius instead of: Lsuius.

152 n. **XXIII, 365-366.** more extensive explanation of Is. 9, 4. **w.
VI, 231-234.** 153

But they were no match for them in strength. For he divided three
hundred men into three battle formations, and provided them for such a
great battle with strange weapons, namely with trumpets and jars in
which fire was enclosed, and addressed them thus \[Judges 7:17 ff\]:
\"Look upon me, and do likewise; and behold, when I come into the place
of the army, as I do, so do ye also. When I blow the trumpet, and all
that are with me, then ye also shall blow the trumpet round about the
whole host, saying: Here, Lord, and Gideon. So Gideon, and an hundred
men with him, came to the place of the host, to the first watchmen that
were appointed, and stirred them up, and blew with trumpets, and brake
the pitchers in their hands. So all the three companies round about
blew, and brake the pitchers: and they held the torches in their left
hand, and the trumpets in their right hand, to blow, and to cry: Hie
sword of the LORD, and Gideon! And every man stood in his place round
about the host. Then the whole army ran, and cried out, and fled. And
when the three hundred men had blown the trumpets, the LORD caused every
man\'s sword to be against every man\'s in the camp.\"

134\. So also this our child shall smite his enemies, and in like manner
shall he obtain victory over all his adversaries. This is not what
happened with the victory that was obtained over Sanherib \[Isa.
37:36\]. The war against Sanherib was a war Tenuphah, and was conducted
by the angels. Tenuphah was the weaving sacrifice, which was moved
against all four parts of the world; Terumah was the lifting sacrifice,
which was lifted up on high. In the same way in the Pabstthum this
custom is still maintained, since one lifts the cup in the height,
likewise when they consecrate the bread, as they call it, they make a
cross against the four parts of the world. Such a war was the one
against Sanherib, namely a war Tenuphah, that is, a war which was waged
in the four parts of the camp in the form of a cross. For the angels
smote the army of the Assyrians in such a way that at all ends the
enemies were smitten and slain, numbering an hundred and five and eighty
thousand. So there was

Not human weakness, as here with the army of Gideon, but the power of
the angels, who crossed the army and destroyed it. So the victory that
Gideon achieved was completely different. Here was not the power of the
angels, but the highest weakness. Here the enemies were put to flight
and defeated by such weapons, which had the appearance that the enemies
could be defeated and killed by them as little as by straws.

\(135\) And Isaiah marvels at this, that in this supreme weakness, as it
was with Gideon, so glorious a victory was obtained. For what can be
conceived weaker, what is more admirable, than that three hundred men,
who were not armed with any weapons with which the enemy could have been
beaten (for though they had something of such weapons, they did not use
them in this battle), that, I say, according to the number, so few men,
who were not armed and armored at all, but had only trumpets and
pitchers, and fire enclosed in the pitchers, should make themselves out
against so great an army of war, which was well armed with all kinds of
weapons, and that so mighty an army of war should be beaten by these
weapons, namely by trumpets and pitchers? For the sound of the trumpets
alone, which entered their ears, and the fire which fell into their
eyes, brought about this glorious and marvelous victory. In the same
way, our child who was born to us and the Son who was given to us
overcame his enemies and won us just such a victory. Nothing like this
happened to King Hezekiah, which could be compared to the victory over
the Midianites. Therefore, this passage cannot be understood by
Hezekiah, as the foolish Jews dream.

I do not think much of allegories, except when necessity forces us to do
so. At this point, however, an allegory is highly necessary. For here
the spiritual war is indicated, because the prophet speaks of the
killing and destruction of death, sin and the law. Therefore this whole
war is

154 L- xxm, 368-370. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 234-237.
155

on the spiritual Amalekites and the other enemies, and on the spiritual
Gideon. Those three enemies of the people of God, Gideon and his men
alone struck and destroyed them by the trumpets and the fire. However,
the fire did not burn them, nor did the sound of the trumpets kill them,
nor did it strike them down, but only frightened them, as I said. They
alone were struck down by terror when they heard the trumpets and saw
the fire. They did not feel the flame or the fire, nor was even a hair
on their head hurt by the fire, but they were so terrified by the mere
sight of the fire and the sound of the trumpets that they surprised
themselves as they fled. Truly, those who stood with Gideon against such
a great multitude had excellent faith.

1\) But we want to look at the secret interpretation a little bit. The
trumpet is actually the voice of the gospel. The leader of the army is
the son who was given to us and the child who was born to us, the right
Gideon, the breaker and healer \[Richt. 6, 25\]; he leads the army. But
what army, and how is it constituted? The apostles and thieves of the
word throughout the world. But with what weapons are they armed? Not
with sword and iron, not with fire or other bodily weapons, so that with
these weapons they should attack the world with hostility, turn it back
and destroy it. \"For the weapons of our knighthood are not carnal,\"
says Paul, \"but mighty in the sight of GOD\" 2c. Cor. 10:4\]. We do
indeed contend in the flesh, but not through the flesh or carnally. We
are indeed born in sins, but having been called to the army of this
host, we have and bear nothing but trumpets, and light in our cups, and
we break the earthen vessels, that is, we take up the cross, and are
subject to the tribulations in which all the godly are exercised.

I do not pretend to be a perfect teacher and master in secret
interpretations, but I do think that they are

1\) Here we have omitted the number \"136.\" because it is duplicated in
Walch.

very fitting and appropriate at this point. The. Trumpet is the voice of
the Gospel. This voice alone strikes the enemies to the ground. We are
the earthen vessels; we carry our treasure in supreme weakness, in
earthen vessels Cor. 4:7\]. We are exceedingly weak earthen vessels; the
martyred, afflicted, and tormented to the point of death consciences
show the power of the Holy Spirit, which does great wonders. Thus the
power of our Gideon becomes mighty in our weakness \[2 Cor. 12:9\]. If
the fire that is shut up in the earthen vessels is to break forth and be
seen, the earthen vessel must be broken, that is, we must be subjected
to many tribulations and be killed by many perils; as also the Gentiles
have said: Let no great and memorable deed be done without great danger.
Such a breaking, struggling and fearing, as takes place in the birth,
must also take place here, so that we may be killed. For the gift and
power of the Holy Spirit is manifested and especially exerts itself when
we are most pressed, constrained and crushed.

138\. But every lover of the holy scriptures should note here that all
the killing of the enemies that occurs in the biblical stories means the
spiritual killing that this child, who was born to us, works with his
servants through the sound of the trumpets, and by the light enclosed in
the earthen vessels, that is, by the Word and the Holy Spirit, he so
terrifies and moves the enemies of the people of God that they go within
themselves and kill themselves with their swords, and say to the
shepherds of their souls: Dear pastor, I realize that I have sinned.
Before I did not see the trumpets and the earthen vessels, but now I see
and realize my misery and ruin, and I deceive myself about my sins,
which I have committed against my God so freely. I repent of having
persecuted the people of God, the true religion, and the godly teachers.
I ask you to forgive me and, according to Christ\'s command, absolve me,
a wretched man, who groans under this burden of sins, and who is
mortally wounded and martyred by sins.

156 XXIII, 370-372. extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 4. W. VI, 237-240.
157

If we judge ourselves in this way, we will not be judged by the Lord \[1
Cor. 11:31\]. But I judge myself thus, and stab myself with my own
sword, when I condemn my foolish, impudent and wanton flesh. Likewise,
if I regret and repent from the heart that I have blasphemed the Son of
God by keeping the Mass, that I have taken the Son of God for a mockery,
and have been a church robber. I was such a robber for fifteen years, as
Paul also complains and confesses in 1 Tim. 1, 13 that he had been a
blasphemer, a persecutor and a taunter before. All this old man, who was
a fool and ungodly, who reviled and crucified the Son of God, this one,
I say, I kill and slay with my own sword, with my tongue and with all my
strength, saying from my heart, \"I have sinned. This murder or slaying
comes from the sound of the trumpet and the light of the flame.

This is the victory of this child, who was born and given to us. He
converts the Gentiles by the Word and the Holy Spirit, so that they kill
themselves, that is, judge; not by the sword, but by true repentance and
spiritual joy, so that they serve him in fear and rejoice with trembling
\[Ps. 2:11\]. Those who confess and acknowledge their sins, and take
refuge in Christ, are incorporated into Christ, and thus become the
spoil snatched from the devil, Luc. 11:22, who is the author of sin and
death. Thus the evil conscience, sin and death are killed, which are
certainly glorious and magnificent victories. The conscience, which
until now was troubled by the law and had to endure the accusation of
the law, is now joyful and glad, and thanks our: GOD that it has
obtained such a happy and glorious victory that sin is swallowed up,
and, now that it is freed, sings, \"Death, where is thy sting? Hell,
where is thy victory?\" \[1 Cor. 15, 55.\] 1)

141\. although this victory over sin, over the law and over death does
not become complete in this life, although these

1\) In the editions after the Vulgate: Nom, ubi vietoriu tun? Ildi
stinln\" do\", internal? Likewise in the following paragraph.

our enemies are not so overcome that they cannot start their quarrel
against us anew, that they should not always trouble us, yet already
here the beginning is made to sing this song of triumph: \"Death, where
is your sting? Hell, where is thy victory?\" Through Christ we have
restored and redeemed everything far better than it was lost in paradise
through the transgression of the first parents, even though we still
have to struggle. But thanks be to God, who has given us the victory
over sin, over the sting of death, and also that the law does not accuse
\[1 Cor. 15:57\]; or if it wants to accuse, then I can take hold of this
child in faith and set it against death. Although the law always comes
back, and does not cease to attack us, and does not cease to afflict us
in this life, yet the victory is finally on our side, until it is fully
obtained there.

So it is certain that the Son of God, the child born to us, in this way,
in this life, frightens and deters death, sin and the law, our most
dangerous enemies, and puts them to flight and beats them. It is true
that in this life death is not completely eradicated, sin is not
completely taken away, the accusation of conscience does not completely
cease, we sometimes turn pale at the mention of death, we are even
violently dismayed and sometimes grieved; but we do have a remedy if we
oppose these things to the child that is born to us:, and say with
certain confidence: Devil, do you also know that you have pricked this
child in the heel? Law, do you know that you have innocently accused and
condemned this son? Death, do you also know that you have devoured this
one who was without any guilt? When they hear the name of this child,
they are immediately deterred and take flight, and have no power against
us. Why? Because the devil has committed such a sin that cannot be
atoned for; therefore, he is guilty of eternal death and eternal
damnation. Because he killed the completely innocent Son of God, the
supreme person, the only majesty to be worshipped, for which he is the
only one.

158 k. XXIII, 372-374. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 240-242.
159

had no cause at all, as Christ says Joh. 14, 30: \"The prince of this
world is coming, but he has nothing on me. The devil could not find
fault with this person; nevertheless, he condemned him to death and
removed him from the way. Therefore, the devil is now guilty for
eternity. The sin he committed against this person cannot be forgiven
nor atoned for, because he can never make up for killing the Son of God.

For this reason Christ has swallowed up in himself the devil who raged
against him, and not only by virtue of his divine omnipotence, but also
with the highest right, has thrown him completely to the ground and
deprived him of all his power, so that he must be subject to him for
eternity, and indeed so subject that even when he only hears his name he
pales and trembles, must hastily take flight, and cease to practice his
intrigues, because he knows in his conscience that he is judged and
condemned.

Thus this child, through a miraculous counsel and way, has acquired this
glorious victory, and indeed he has acquired and given it to us.
Therefore, if you believe in Christ, you have his power, and through him
you will overcome sin, death and the devil. And although this victory
has not yet been fulfilled and completed on this earth, it has been
happily begun and will be most happily completed after this life.
Therefore, every godly person who believes in Christ is an exceedingly
powerful lord in Christ, in that he has power over the power of the
devil. Luc. 10, 19. Christ says: \"Behold, I give you power over all the
power of the enemy, and nothing will harm you. And Ps. 91:13 \[Vulg.\]
it is written, \"Upon serpents and vipers shalt thou go, and tread upon
the young lion and dragon\"; likewise Job 40:20, \"Canst thou drag
Leviathan with a hame, and catch his tongue with a rope?\" 2c.

145\. This indeed divine power to overcome our enemies and to trample
them underfoot we have to thank, as I said, for the grace and merit of
the Son of God. For he came into the world so that he might die for the
sins of the world and

and deliver those who believe in him from the curse of the law and from
eternal death, and having taken on human nature, he humbled himself and
took on the form of a servant \[Phil. 2:7J. The devil was deceived by
this form, thinking that he was a sinner like others, subjected him to
the law, and condemned him to death. But because he was not only
righteous and true, but was righteousness itself, the truth and the
life, which makes all who believe righteous and alive, the law, sin,
death, the devil, had no right to accuse, condemn and kill him. But what
he did, he did willingly for our sake; therefore the greatest wrong was
done to him.

Therefore, the law is guilty before God for eternity, death is also
guilty, sin is also guilty, the devil is also guilty. All these enemies
have been overcome by the glorious victory of this person who could
neither sin nor be condemned. Over all these enemies she has triumphed.
Therefore it is said to those who believe in Christ, \"You have no cause
to fear the devil, sin, death, the accusation of the law; be joyful and
of good cheer; the victory has come through this child who was born to
us and through this Son who was given to us, who was subjected to the
law, sin, death, and the devil, and yet could not be subjected.
Therefore, the law, sin, death and Satan have lost their right, and are
brought into bondage as conquered according to the law of war. So we
should hope for victory and salvation through this child, who was born
to us, and through this son, who was given to us so that he could
overcome these enemies and free us, who were oppressed by their tyranny.

The prophet Isaiah speaks of this spiritual, exceedingly great and most
glorious victory, not of the defeat of the army of Sanherib, as the Jews
dream. Moreover, this subject or matter of the abolition of the law, and
that these enemies, namely death, sin and Satan, have been overcome, has
been treated at length in other places.

**160** L- XXIII, 374-376. broader explanation of Isa. 9, 4. 5. W. VI,
242-245. **161**

This theology is not understood by human reason, and our theologians in
the papacy have not understood it either, at least they have not been
able to treat it properly from Isaiah and Paul. This is sufficiently
evident from the fact that they have chosen only those chapters that
contain moral teachings, but very rarely those that deal with the
theology that teaches that we come to this unbelievable and inestimable
glory without works, without our merits, in vain and by grace, that we
are set up as lords, overcomers and judges over death, over sin, over
the law itself that accuses, over hell and the whole host of devils.

But we have now said enough about this glorious victory; although these
things are of such great importance and majesty that they can never be
treated sufficiently and with dignity. Now follows in the text:

V. 5. **for all warfare with impetuosity 1) and bloody garments will be
burned up and consumed with fire.**

Now the prophet explains what kind of victory it will be by the sound of
the trumpet and the appearance of the flame. It will not be a physical
war, as the Jews expect and imagine. For the bloodthirsty people wish
that it would come to this, that they would kill the Gentiles with the
sword, and after the extermination of all Gentiles, they would reign
alone in the world, so that not one drop of Christian blood would
remain. That is how much they thirst for Christian blood. Therefore they
kill the children of Christians either with the sword or with poison or
by whatever other means they can manage. And they think that they would
also be doing God a favor by destroying all nations and giving the earth
to the children of Israel alone. Against this Isaiah says: \"I have now
spoken of the victory, how it will be and how great it will be, namely a
very glorious victory; but it will not be a physical war or a physical
victory.

151 Here is some difficulty as far as grammar is concerned. In Hebrew it
says

1\) Vulgate: Huia ornnis violenta praeäatio \"um tuwultu.

not: Omnis violenta praedatio, as Jerome translated it, but it reads:
Omnis Seon Soen in tumultu, et vestimentum involutum sanguine etc.. We
have already had above some words that are unknown to the grammarians in
the Hebrew language, because the same has largely fallen into decay, as
far as the word theory (grammaticam positivam) is concerned, in which
the words and names of things are taught. In syntax, too, much is still
lacking. If we had not had the Latin and the Greek Bible, we would
perhaps have hardly half of the Hebrew language. They have taught the
declensions and the conjugations diligently enough, but the words that
designate things and the figurative speeches do not explain them, but
make them obscure. Therefore, this deficiency must be remedied from the
New Testament, especially from Paul and John, who have explained many
words.

It is not yet determined what the word Seon is. For it is read nowhere
else in the Bible than in this place. But as much as one can conclude
from the circumstances, it seems to mean as much as a skirmish, quarrel
or meeting, which the Germans call \"a battle\", namely the clash of the
parties in the fight itself, when they become hand in hand, when foot
stands to foot, and man to man close together; as the poet 2) speaks:

. . . Haeret pede pes, densusque viro vir.

In this clash there is a great clashing of weapons, a great movement, a
great tumult; and in sum, heaven and earth seem to tremble. This one\'s
wound is struck, that one\'s body is pierced; this one\'s blood runs
down his back, another\'s down his chest 2c.

. . . 3) Fremit aequore toto Insultans sonipes, et pressis pugnat
habenis, Huc obversus et huc; tum late ferreus hastis Horret ager,
campique armis sublimibus ar- dent:

2\) Virgil, lid. X, V. 361.

3\) The following is a selection of verses from Virg. \^6N., lid. XI.
Namely: V. 599-602. 611. 610. 613. 614. 632-635.

162 L. XXIII, 376-378. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 245-248.
163

Crebra, nivis ritu, funduntur undique tela. Connixi incurrunt hastis,
praefractaqueD qua- drupedantum

Pectora pectoribus rumpunt, legitque virum vir.

Tum vero et gemitus morientum, et sanguine in alto,

Armaque corporaque, et permixti caede virorum,

Semianimes volvuntur equi etc.

\[On the whole plan the proud horse neighs and resists the tight reins
by which it is steered here and there. Then the field stares from iron
lances and the fields shine from delicious weapons. Dense, like
snowflakes, projectiles are hurled from all sides. Vigorously they
attack with spears, one hard horse breast shatters another, and each
picks his man. But then the groans of the dying are also heard, and in
deep blood arms and bodies roll, and among slain men the perishing
horses 2c.\] In such a meeting as Virgil describes in these verses,
there is a great movement, a strong clashing of weapons, a great tumult.
This process and the fight itself, when the first attack happens, or the
first heat is there, when the taratantara and the trumpet sound, when
the call to arms is made, the Hebrews call Seon; and this tumult is
aroused by the shouting of the men, by the neighing and stamping of the
horses, by the banging of the guns, by the sound of the trumpets 2c.

Therefore, the opinion seems to be this: Thou hast broken the yoke of
their burden, the rod of the driver, and the rod of their shoulder, as
in the days of Midian, where there was no meeting at all between two
enemies. For Gideon only blew with three hundred trumpets, and broke as
many pitchers that had fire in them. It was not a war with swords
against swords, with spears against spears, nor wound against wound, but
the enemies killed each other with their own swords, and slaughtered
each other. You have heard above \[§ 138) in the allegory that herewith
it is implied, it is

1\) In our edition of Virgil, the reading here is: psrkruetu.

sinners and the ungodly would be destroyed by their own tongues, that
is, they confess their errors and sins after being frightened and moved
by the trumpet of the gospel and by the fire of the Holy Spirit.

**V. 5. for all warfare with impetuosity, and bloody garments shall be
burned and consumed with fire.**

The Hebrew word raash \[XXX\] does not actually mean a tumult, as I have
said, but a very great movement, shouting, roaring of horses, weapons
and men, as it happens at a meeting; or a terrifying thunderstorm; as
Ps. 18:8 ff: \"The earth quaked and was moved\" 2c., where in a kind of
personal poetry the terrifying appearance of a thunderstorm in the air,
or the anger of the sky or the clouds is described. For in a
thunderstorm, when the Lord makes himself heard and brings forth his
thunder, everything is moved and trembles; the sky, the earth, the sea,
the air crack from the thunder, lightnings come out of the black and
thick clouds, the trees are overthrown and struck down, the animals are
killed 2c.

Therefore, the prophet says: \"Every fight or encounter in the battles
takes place with roaring, shouting, roaring, and with a terrifying
tumult, with violent movement and trembling. Wounds are struck, there is
a lamentable killing, rivers of blood flow, clothes are soaked and
stained with blood. But such a battle, such meetings will not take place
in the kingdom of this child, our King and Savior. For such a tumult,
such soaking and covering of clothes in blood, the fire will consume and
devour, that is, there will never be such a bloody war in the church.

But what does he mean by saying, \"The fire will consume\" 2c.? The Jews
falsify these words mischievously, and interpret them in this way: All
battles, or all warfare, are indeed done with a tnmult, and the garments
are soaked or dyed with blood in the battles, but this warfare, which
our Messiah will wage, will be done in the

164 k. xxiii, 378-380. broader\'explanation of Isa. 9, 5. W. vi,
248-251. 165

Fire of a thunderstorm that will come down from heaven, as it happened
in the time of Sanherib. The blindness and audacity of the Jews is
terrifying, who twist everything to their liking to the dreams of their
brain.

This is not the opinion of the prophet at all, what they dream, but he
indicates, that this kingdom of the child will be a kingdom of peace and
security, not a warlike kingdom; this king will not fight after the
manner of the worldly kings, he will not shed the blood of the enemies,
he will not strike down all who come in his way, he will not do terrible
murder, as it happens in the meetings 2c. Therefore the prophet calls
him soon after \[v. 6.\] a prince of peace. And Cap. 11, 9. he describes
his kingdom in these words, \"One shall nowhere let, nor perish on my
holy mountain.\" And Cap. 2, 4: \"No nation shall lift up a sword
against another, neither shall they learn war any more.\" For in the
church there will be no physical warfare, \"for the land is full of the
knowledge of the Lord\" \[Isa. 11:9\]. The knowledge of God will be so
superfluous, like the water in the flood of sin, that war or sword will
no longer be necessary. Then their swords will be turned into
plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks.

The same prophecy that is written in the second chapter, he also
prophesies here of the Kingdom of Christ, indicating that God will send
fire on earth in the time of this King, who will be a consuming fire,
devouring the terrifying impetuosity of wars, as also the 46th Psalm, v.
10, says: \"He who controls wars in all the world, who breaks bows,
shatters spears, and burns chariots with fire. Therefore he prophesies
here that the Holy Spirit, the fire of God, will consume all weapons.
\"Devouring fire goeth before him, and great weather round about him,\"
says the 50th Psalm, v. 3, that is, when the knowledge of the Lord is
superfluous, that is, when this King of eternal peace, eternal
righteousness and eternal life will be preached, and when he will fill
the whole world with the word of the gospel so abundantly that all
tongues and peoples will have to hear and recognize it: then who will be
able to hear and recognize the gospel?

When the battles cease, people will no longer fight with each other,
they will not fight with physical weapons that strike wounds and kill.

There is a significant distance and a clear difference between a worldly
kingdom and the kingdom of Christ. Christ did not come to kill and
destroy, but that those who believe in Him might have life and be saved,
as He testifies in the Gospel \[Luc. 9, 56. Joh. 3, 17. 12, 47.Z He did
not come to wage war on this earth, but to crush the head of the
serpent, that is, to free us from the very harsh servitude of the devil,
with which he subjugated the whole human race through sin and death 2c.

160 With these words: \"For all war\" 2c. the prophet indicates that it
will not be such a war as the world wages, but a completely different
one. For the Holy Spirit would completely abolish this war, and change
the hearts, so that people would be united among themselves, that they
would praise God with one accord, and the godly would crucify and kill
other enemies than the earthly enemies. But who these enemies would be
that would be destroyed by the godly, he said above \[v. 4\], namely,
the yoke of the burden, and the rod of the shoulder, and the scepter of
the driver. This will be the war in which the godly will finally receive
the most glorious victory through the power of this child, who is the
king of peace 2c. Therefore, they will also rejoice greatly that they
are delivered from the law, sin, death, the devil. This, I say, will be
the war that the Christians will wage, not such a war as the world
wages. For Christians do not wage war after the manner of the world with
swords and spears. \"The weapons of our knighthood,\" says Paul 2 Cor.
10:4, 5, \"are not carnal, but mighty in the sight of GOD.\" He says
they are sharp and mighty, not before the flesh, but before GOD. To what
end? What use are they? \"To disturb the fortifications, that we may
disturb the temples, and every high thing that exalteth itself against
the knowledge of God.\" This is a different dispute than the dispute of
the world is. These weapons

466 L. XXIII, 380-382. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 251-254.
467

The people of the world attack all science and wisdom that opposes the
wisdom and knowledge of God. With these weapons they fight against the
wisdom of the law, against the justice of the law, yes, against the
justice of the whole world in moral things.

So our weapons are spiritual, with which we fight against sin, against
death, against the accusation of the law, against the evil spirits under
heaven, against the rulers of the world who rule in the darkness of this
world \[Eph. 6:12\]. We also conquer and destroy the strongholds of the
devil when we spiritually kill those who live in the righteousness of
the flesh, when we snatch out of it those who are in the misery of sin
and covered with darkness, and lie as drunkards in deep sleep, and call
them to a better life and repentance, They call us to a better life and
to repentance, bring us back on the right path, instruct us in heavenly
wisdom, lead us to the knowledge of the truth, so that they praise and
confess with us the Son of God who was given to us and the child who was
born to us, as the conqueror of death, sin, the law, hell and the devil,
the most terrible and most abominable enemies. This is the most
beautiful and glorious conflict, without bodily weapons, without wounds,
overcoming through another\'s toil and danger, and carrying off a
victory without bloodshed over such great enemies.

A bodily sword does nothing against death, the devil and the law that
accuses the conscience; it has no sharpness, it does not wound, it does
not hurt, it does not put to flight, it does not kill these spiritual
enemies of ours. Therefore, there is no hope at all in the bodily
weapons. Therefore, they are thrown away by the Christians and they are
burned by the fire of the Holy Spirit. They are burned up not only in so
far as they are of no use spiritually, but also externally, because no
Christian fights against another with these bodily weapons, nor does he
use them. For the Holy Spirit, who is poured into our hearts, changes us
and instills in us the love of harmony and the search for peace, and
calls us to love one another. And he directs

and shape our hearts in such a way that we forgive one another\'s
offenses, gladly forgive one another\'s faults, patiently bear our
neighbor\'s errors and weaknesses.

This is the fire of the Holy Spirit, which changes and transforms our
hearts, so that when insults occur, I do not take up arms against you,
nor you against me. So all carnal weapons are burned up and turned into
ashes among the truly godly. Paul says the same thing in Eph. 2:14 ff.
when he says that through Christ the enmity is taken away, and the fence
is broken down between us Gentiles and the Jews, and that we are united
and reconciled into one body, into one new man, so that we live in one
mind, one heart and one soul. What you believe, I also believe; what you
hope, I also hope. Therefore, we love one another and are brothers who
love one another very much. Where hearts are united in one spirit
through one faith, there can certainly be no war.

This is Christ\'s, our child\'s, peaceable, gracious and loving kingdom,
which stands in one faith, in pure love and spiritual harmony. When a
priest wants to preach, he does not draw a sword (as is customary among
the Mahomedans, among whom the teachers of the Alkoran hold a bare sword
in their hand while they are teaching, thus implying that this doctrine
has arisen and been fixed by the sword, and must also be protected with
the sword). I, too, when I preach or want to hear a sermon, do not bring
a sword with me; we do not arm ourselves for a meeting, we do not go at
each other with spears in hostility, but we are gathered together with
one accord and are gathered to the One Son of God, to one and the same
grace, and to the forgiveness of sin; we also rejoice with one accord in
the spirit, give thanks to God, and praise and extol Him who has made us
one in the Holy Spirit and in true love. This, I say, is what the
heavenly fire does, by which the bodily weapons are completely burned
up. This fire of God, the Holy Spirit, ignites our hearts and consumes
the weapons.

168 L- XXIII, 3\^2-384. broader explanation of Isa. 9, 5. W. vi,
254-257. 169

And from this you can see the difference between the kingdom of the Son
of God and the kingdom of the world. Through this kingdom of the child,
this our Son of God, the authorities and the worldly orders and the
obedience of the subjects are not abolished, rather we are subjected to
this civil life according to your old and external people, because not
all of them are Christians who claim to be. The largest part of the
world remains godless and unbelieving. Since the world offends God by
its godlessness and by the untamable licentiousness of its depraved and
vicious life, it follows that there is either no peace at all in the
world, or only seldom and little peace. And this is the reward given to
the world for its ungodliness and wickedness. Thus, it is punished by
God.

So now we have to live among such people who wage wars. In this hostel
and in this camp of the godless people one must spend one\'s life. War
is not abolished among the godless, but only among and among the godly.
We Christians are all one body through faith, Eph. 4, 4. 1 Cor. 12, 12,
but according to the body we carry we are subject to worldly power and
worldly things. The church, the kingdom of Christ, is united in all
things and of one mind. In the worldly kingdom things are quite
different, and there everything is done quite differently than in the
spiritual kingdom. Among the wicked, peace on this earth cannot exist
nor endure, because of the wickedness and evil deeds of the world
against God, as I have said. Since we are under authority according to
the outward man, we must obey the orders of the authorities and also go
to war when necessity demands it. In the household, we build the fields,
take care of the trade, and govern those who belong to our house. These
are divine, but nevertheless external orders. The household does not
belong to the heavenly kingdom, but it is necessary as long as we live
here. Thus we must also have worldly orders, and we are subject to them
according to the outward man.

This must be diligently and wisely distinguished. For we can hardly
prevent, as much as we take the utmost care, that the secular and the
ecclesiastical matters are not mixed and confused with each other. The
pope tears through, makes no distinction here, but as a cook mixes many
broths (jura)^1^ ) among each other, so he mixes, disturbs, distracts
and reverses everything. And in this he proves his name perfectly. For
Christ said Matth. 24, 15. He said that he is \"the abomination of
desolation,\" by which he meant that he would destroy the worldly
government, the household and the church, that he would bring them to an
abominable ruin and wretched destruction with his new doctrines, holy
water, statutes of men, fictitious and ungodly worship, and his own
works of righteousness, which have been introduced and established
against Christ and his gospel, and by these devices he would make the
church and the worldly government, the laws and the kings subject to
himself. And these he has also so brought under his yoke, so beguiled,
so held captive, that they have been forced to obey this ugly monster,
this desolation, or this ravager and destroyer in all things at a
beckon.

For because of his power, the pope says, the laws should not refuse to
be guided by the holy canons. If he had said, \"The laws should not
refuse to be guided by the word of God,\" he would have spoken rightly
and godly. For the laws that do not agree with the word of GOD must be
improved according to the word of GOD. But so, by his holy, nay, rather
accursed canons, which dispute with the word of GOD, he has prescribed
laws according to his pleasure even to the emperors. In short, he ruled
in all things and over everything, and arrogated to himself the worldly
rule, and in this way devastated the worldly government.

169\. he has also devastated the household, robbing the sons and
daughters, killing the parents through the disobedience of the children.

1\) The word jura has a twofold meaning, namely \"rights\" and
\"soups\".

170 L. XXIII, 384-386. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 257-260.
171

The pope wanted such unions to be considered valid, for those who hide
in monasteries or marry without the consent of their parents. Has he not
also almost seized the goods of the whole world? that there has been no
one whom he has not robbed, from whom he has not taken something of his
fortune, from whom he has not extorted money either by indulgences or
privileges, or by threats of banishment and curses, and by other
artifices and frauds. This is why Christ gave it its proper name,
calling it destruction or desolation, since he not only devastated the
church, but also the secular government and the household. But he has so
devastated, confused and mixed up everything that we can hardly with
great difficulty bring the way of life and the status of each one back
into their proper boundaries, and circumscribe and fence them with their
barriers.

Therefore, we cry out and argue with the greatest zeal, so that a
certain, and clear, and undoubted distinction, and a proper description
of each state, may be obtained, that the household belongs to the
government of children and family, that the parents govern the
household, that the temporal princes govern the commonwealth, and that
the subjects obey. Likewise, that the knowledge of the Son of God be
taught in the Church, so that all believers may be unanimous with
respect to this Child who is born and given to us; that we put to death
sin, that we offer a hand to the fallen brother and help him up, that we
come to the aid of the needy, that we do the works of life against
death, the works of righteousness against sin, the works of consolation
against the troubled conscience, against the devil and despair, that we
exercise love for one another among ourselves, that we do not separate
unity, that we give alms 2c. This belongs to the church. But these works
are not proper works of the church if they do not flow from faith and
love.

This distinction between the secular regime, the household and the
church must be diligently preserved, and each estate must be kept within
its proper bounds.

will be. And although we have worked for this with all our strength,
Satan will not cease to mix and confuse it, and there will never be a
lack of people who will not keep within the bounds of their office. The
teachers who are filled with a false spirit (spirituosi), who are
enthusiastic and rebellious, and who are not satisfied with their
office, also usurp the secular government. On the other hand, the
secular authorities and princes also send their sickle into a foreign
harvest, and lay their hands on the rudder of the church regime, and
take over the rule here as well. Thus the devil always has his tools,
who cause trouble here and transgress the prescribed limits of their
profession.

Therefore, great care must be taken to keep the description of the three
main classes (hierarchiarum) appointed by God correct and well
distinguished. A woman shall not wear man\'s clothes, and a man shall
not wear woman\'s clothes. Let each one remain in his profession, let
each one keep his place, and keep within the limits of his office, and
not overstep the mark. Let every way of life and every station keep
itself within its circle, within its limits and within its bounds.

We do not hate the princes, we do not hate the lawyers (whether they
love us, God knows; what they think of us, how favorable they are to us,
their hearts testify); we do not hate the nobles, nor anyone else, but
this we do, this we desire, so that every estate (hierarchia) may be
preserved within its limits, that each one may do his office, that the
estates and the different offices may not be mixed and blended. We teach
that every rank is divine, or instituted by God; we despise none. But we
work so that they are not mixed together. There is no place for
mongrelism here. If the worldly regime is mixed with the household,
fornication and other abominable shameful deeds arise. When the
household is mixed with the worldly regime, tyrannies arise. When it is
mixed with the church, heresies arise. In short, when these are mixed
with each other

**172** L. xxni, 386-388. broader explanation of Isa. 9, 5. 6. W. vi,
260-263. **173**

mixed, then the devil has his work. But nothing good comes from the
works of the devil. That is why the prophets said before that the church
would be a kingdom distinct from the kingdom of the world; it would not
be a worldly kingdom, not a domestic kingdom, but a spiritual kingdom.

All the Jews twist these words to refer to a physical war and think that
the prophet is talking about some war that was waged with the enemies of
God\'s people. But the prophets mean nothing less than this in this and
other similar passages. Cap. 11, 9, our prophet says: \"Alan shall not
perish nor perish on my holy mountain; for the land is full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as it is covered with the waters of the sea\";
that is, the word or doctrine of the Lord shall be preached far and
wide. That Son, the Child, will reign through the Word in the whole
world. This same one will take away all warfare with impetuosity (in
which blood is shed, wounds are inflicted, and murder takes place) from
the midst of the Church, which is an assembly of believers through the
Holy Spirit. But new people are born every day, so the burning fire
always has something to consume. 1) Why?

V. 6. **For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given.**

This is an excellent and splendid passage; if only I were skillful
enough to treat it. But I will say and do as much as I can. I will also
leave something for others who are more skilled in the Scriptures. But
the cause why there is no tumult and bloodshed in this kingdom, and why
it is not ruled by carnal weapons and wars, is this: Because, saith he,
we have a child to be our king. A child reigns, it will be a kingdom of
a child, and lovely. Children do not bear arms; a child is a child. He
saith not, For unto us a man is born, a king, a prophet, a David, a
giant, as he might well have said, for in other places Christ bears
these names; but he saith, A child is born unto us.\"

1\) In the editions: eidus i\^nises.

seems to us that eomdursutis should be read.

And with this he describes how the kingdom of this child is, namely, an
exceedingly lovely, friendly and pleasant kingdom. The manners of a
little child are innocent; the little children are not carried away by
passions, they do not indulge in their desires, they do not let their
anger run wild, they are not driven by intemperate anger to revenge
against those by whom they have been offended. Thus, by calling this
king a child, he describes the nature and form of his kingdom, namely,
that it will be an exceedingly lovely and amiable kingdom, and that the
king should be such that one could play with him as with a babe of one
or two years; that he will be a kind, childlike, pleasant king, from
whom one can easily obtain everything, in whom and with whom one can
delight oneself, from whom one can have the highest pleasure.

Although he is a child, he is nevertheless also a lord and prince. He is
a child, so that no one will be frightened away from him and be afraid
of him. He is a lord and prince, so that no one despises him. In the
evangelical history, we find in him a wonderful and unbelievable
gentleness, friendliness, and devotion to the penitent and godly. His
simplicity is also so great that he seems to surpass the children in it.
He humbles himself so much, he lets himself down so low, he is so easy
to handle and to talk to that the apostles seem to play with him and are
less afraid of him than of a little child. He shows that he is such a
sweet and friendly king that it seems as if there is no difference
between him and a child. There is nothing but play, caressing and
pleasantness when he deals with us.

However, he is a child only to us who believe in him. To the wicked,
however, he is not a child, but a terrifying thunderbolt and judge; and
he is not born to them, but to us. We, I say, who believe in him, have
in him as gentle and kind a king as if we had a little child with whom
we could play very safely and sweetly, in whom we could find an
exceedingly great and our highest pleasure. For

174 L. XXIII, 388-390. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 263-266.
175

What is there to fear in such a kingdom, which is not governed by
external weapons? Should one be afraid of him who lies in the manger,
who hangs on the cross, who lets himself be led like a sheep to the
slaughter, who voluntarily dies for his own, who rests in the arms and
in the bosom of his mother, who sucks at the breasts? What is more
gentle than such a king? What is less to be feared? Why are you afraid
of him? You have no reason to tremble. He will not bite you, not tear
you, not hurt you. He does not hold a sword in his hands, but the
breasts of his mother. He is a child, he lies in the manger.

Nevertheless, he is the most powerful Lord of the world, as it is
written in the 72nd Psalm, v. 8: \"He will rule from sea to sea, and
from the waters to the end of the world. And the Church sings:

Hic jacet in praesepio, Qui regnat sine termino. \[Here he lies in the
crib, without end is the reign\].

However, he is not a mortal or temporal, but a spiritual and eternal
Lord, and a king of everlasting peace and life. Life, as the same Psalm,
v. 7, testifies: \"In his days shall great peace flourish, till the moon
be no more,\" 2c. Therefore there are no weapons in his kingdom. He is a
child, says Isaiah, he has no teeth, no claws, with him there is no
bite, but the highest gentleness. The same gentleness and goodness of
this king is described by the prophet in the 42nd chapter, v. 1-4, where
the Lord says: \"Behold, this is my servant, I sustain him, and my
chosen, in whom my soul is well pleased. He shall not cry out nor shout,
neither shall his voice be heard in the gape. He will not break the
crushed reed, nor quench the smoldering wick. He will not be sullen nor
atrocious.\"

181 Paul says that he is φιλάνθρωπος,

\[a lover of men\], Tit. 3, 4. For with him is the highest loveliness,
the highest γρηστότης*,* kindness, lightness and friendliness.

lity. The Greeks call such a person agreeable, pleasant, gentle, kind,
friendly and affable, with whom one can talk in all confidence, with
whom one can live agreeably, who interprets everything for the best, who
is not easily angered, of whom one knows that he is kind and gracious,
who forgives gladly, who is willing to do more than one may ask. Such a
one will also be our king. Therefore, it is impossible that in his
kingdom there can be wars and wounds, or bloodshed, because this king is
a child before whom no one can be afraid, but whom all can and should
call upon with confidence.

182\. But only for us, as I said, he is called a child, and is a child
to us, is a son to us. For the adversaries he is not such. Although he
does not kill them with the sword, he will judge them in his own time.
Therefore, a distinction must be made between us and all unbelievers. To
those who believe in him, he is a child, blessed and favored; he cannot
suffer them to be condemned.

When the Pharisees and scribes condemned the disciples of Christ,
saying, \"Your disciples transgress the statutes of the fathers; they do
not wash their hands, they pluck up the ears and eat them on the Sabbath
day,\" Christ answered them, \"If you knew what this is, I am pleased
with mercy and not with sacrifice, you would not have condemned the
innocent. Here we see that Christ could not suffer those who believe in
Him to be condemned. So you see in him in the whole evangelical history
a childlike caressing, sweetness, affability, talkativeness,
friendliness and kindness, which is connected with such a great
simplicity that he seems to be a little child. But where he is aroused
and provoked to anger by the hypocrites, the priests and scribes, he
takes on a completely different form than that of a child, there he
reveals and shows his heavenly and infinite power and wisdom.

184 Likewise, the fact that he adds, \"A son has been given to us,\"
gives us great and rich comfort and hope. For what could God have given
us that is greater?

**176** L. XXIII, 39N-392. More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. W.
VI, 266-268. **177**

We cannot give anything more important than that he has given and
offered us his Son out of infinite goodness and kindness, that he should
speak to us, shower us with his light, and that we should dare to speak
to him again, and that through faith in this child and in this Son we
could stand against the gates of hell and all the terrors of the devil.
The child is born to us, he also remains a child to us. So also a Son is
given to us, and also remains a Son to us; he does not become another
than he was from the beginning of his birth. But if we have the Son, we
have also the Father. But we have this child and this son, the mother
gives him to us, she nurses him, he remains a child to us forever. He
does not show himself to us as one before whom one would have to tremble
because of his frightening seriousness, or because of his frightening
majesty, but he shows himself to us as a little child against little
children, and plays with us for eternity in his childhood. Besides this
so great and so infinite beneficence, we have been given such a beloved
Son of such a great Father. What, then, shall we fear? If God is for us,
who can be against us? (Rom. 8, 31) We have the most precious and
infinite pledge. How then could the Father be angry with us? Yes, even
the Father in the Son and because of the Son is forced (that I say so)
to become a child and to play with us and to caress us, because we have
his Son. For the sake of his beloved Son, we are also beloved children
and heirs of God 2c.

From this we can see what glorious thoughts of the future Christ the
prophets had and how splendid speeches they made, how exuberant they
were in joy when they even thought of his future, and how even the mere
waiting for such great things and their mention delighted them. If we
compare ourselves with them, we are in truth more stones and blocks than
men, since we are not moved at all, or at least very little, by these so
important things, although now this grace and glory is not in our
waiting and hoping, but is already open to us.

The word of God is given into our hands, set before our eyes, offered to
our ears and hearts, and inculcated 1) through the ministry of the Holy
Spirit.

Since such a great light shines upon us, and yet we do not sufficiently
esteem this grace according to dignity, and many even despise and reject
it, since we have such great ingratitude, such great indolence, such
great sleepiness, it is truly no wonder that God is so angry with us
that he sends the Turk, that he oppresses us with the tyranny of the
pope, because of such great ingratitude and contempt for this grace and
light of his that is revealed to us.

It is an infinite and unspeakable blessing of God toward us that He has
given us His only begotten Son, and with Him all things. Shouldn\'t this
supreme and infinite benevolence, love and benevolence of God toward us
move our hearts and fill us with the highest joy, and awaken us to some
gratitude, which we repay God for such a great benevolence, to
everlasting thanksgiving, to the improvement of life, to obedience to
such a kind and merciful Father, if we could recognize this supreme
benevolence, if we could appreciate it according to its dignity and
greatness?

188\. I myself have a great displeasure with myself, and hate myself,
because I know that all that the Scriptures say of Christ is true; that
there can be nothing greater, nothing more important, nothing more
pleasant, nothing more joyful, which should fill me with the highest
joy; because I see that the Scriptures agree in all things and
throughout, and speak in such a manner of one accord, that one cannot in
the least doubt the truth and certainty of so great a thing: and yet I
am hindered by the wickedness of my flesh, and so imprisoned by the law
of sin, that I am not able to put this benefit into all my members, into
all my bones, and even into all my soul.

1\) Here the reading of the editions seems to us to be out of order. The
Erlanger offers: auribus st soräidus nostris Spiritus sansti odiuta st
Ministerio iusuisata. Likewise the Wittenberg, only it has spiritu
instead of Spiritus. We think that this is how it should be read:
auridus sts. Spiritus sansti Ministerio oMatn st insuisata, and have
translated thereafter.

**178** L. XXIII, 3S2-39S. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
268-271. **179**

into the innermost marrow, as I probably would like to.

St. Bernard confesses that he has tasted the sweetness of this knowledge
at times and was filled with unbelievable joy; but he also complains
that, since the flesh prevented it, this tasting did not last long.
Augustine complains about the same thing 2c. I too would have liked to
take these words and very joyful promises into my heart and press them
deeply into it; but the accursed flesh, the wall of sensuality (as godly
monks used to call it), weighs us down, presses us down and holds us
captive in such a way that we cannot grasp this delicious food, this
immeasurable joy, as we should.

Our heart is far too narrow to grasp the scope of this great good deed.
For the greatness of it is so great that if anyone could comprehend that
the Almighty God, the Creator of heaven and earth, plays with us,
caresses us as His most beloved children, is happy with us, and takes
such great care of us, and is so affectionate toward us; If we had a
complete knowledge of this goodness of God towards us, then such a great
joy would arise in us from this knowledge that we would immediately give
up the ghost with infinite joy, or die with the greatest joy. And from
this we see how great our weakness, how great our sleepiness, is, since
few, I do not want to say the sea, but barely a few small droplets of
this immeasurable joy can be tasted.

Therefore we must not snore, but resist the malice of the flesh all the
more valiantly, and strive with all our might that we may always grow in
this knowledge. Peter 2 Ep. 3, 18 exhorts us: \"Grow in the grace and
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Therefore, one must
always progress, one must always learn. One must spend a lot of time on
these reflections, so that this knowledge may continually grow. For in
this weakness and degradation we can achieve a completion (absolutionem)
and a perfection.

We cannot hope for the derbness of the flesh. We can grasp it to some
extent, but not completely.

Therefore, let us practice and contemplate these things diligently and
often, so that we may grow in this knowledge and be strengthened more
and more until the fullness of it comes in true and perfect knowledge.
Therefore, let us diligently practice these things and contemplate them
often, so that we will grow in this knowledge and be strengthened more
and more, until the fullness of it will come in the true and perfect
knowledge. Without contemplation and practice, this knowledge does not
grow. You have not known Christ immediately when you have heard one
sermon and another. You must not say: I have heard that the Son of God
is born for me, therefore I know and know Christ. Far from it. The wall
of sensuality prevents us from feeling the most delightful smell of this
infinite mercy, that your Creator and the Creator of all creatures, who
became a child for your sake, plays with you, and not only this child,
but also the Father in heaven and all the angels. Through our flesh we
are prevented in this life from feeling in our hearts the pleasure that
springs from this supreme and ineffable benefit.

When we come down from this wall of sensuality, when we are freed from
the filth and filthiness of our flesh and enter into that eternal life,
then we will talk with each other about this inexpressible joy, which is
now abundantly presented to us through the Word. Blessed is he who,
through diligent contemplation, tastes and catches even a few sparks and
droplets of this joy! But we will achieve this if we practice reading
and listening, and occupy our minds with these thoughts, with the
exceedingly lovely games of the Son of God, which he lets us see through
his childhood.

**A son is given to us.**

I have said that the kingdom of Christ will be a very peaceful one, that
of a son and a child, because our King was born to us as a child and
given to us as a son; and he is to us and will remain a child and a son
to us forever. Every year this song is repeated: \"To us a child is
born\" 2c., and we will have it from eternity.

180 XXIII, 395-397. extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. W. VI, 271-274.
181

sing to eternity, and in the life to come we will marvel and rejoice
completely in this immeasurable joy that the Son of God is our child,
and the Son who is given to us.

Furthermore, I take the word \"son\" not only in and for itself (nouns),
but also in its relation to others (relative) and in the category of
relationship. For thus the words are, \"A son is given unto us.\" Above
\[v. 4.\] he said that we were oppressed by the yoke of the burden, by
the rod of the shoulder, and by the rod of the driver, that is, captives
of the devil, subject to death, servants of sin, and debtors to the law.
But now it is the other way around through the relationship \[of Christ
to us\]; those who believe in Christ are no longer slaves of death, sin,
the law, and the devil, but children through this Son who has been given
to us. Of this freedom which Christ has purchased, read St. Paul to the
Galatians, Cap. 3, 28: \"Here is no servant,\" 2c., but \"ye are all at
once one in Christ JEsu.\" This bondage, over which there could have
been none harder, has been abolished by this King, by this Son, who has
been given to us; and by this very Son our liberty and filiation have
been acquired and restored to us.

The people of the law have a servant, Moses, who has the office of
death, sin, condemnation and an evil conscience. Therefore Paul calls
the ministry of Moses a ministry of death \[2 Cor. 3, 6\], because it
does not make righteous, but kills, works wrath and imprisons, and does
not make free. We have spoken of this bondage and captivity above \[H
106 ff.\], when we spoke of the rod of the driver. Against this bondage,
and against this office of death, we have the Son, who was given to us
that we might be free, because he was born a freeman, that he might be
our deliverer, and make us free. He was not under the law, or subject to
the law. He was born under the law \[Gal. 4:4\], but not born under the
law, nor was he a debtor to it as far as his person was concerned, but
for our sake he subjected himself to the law.

thrown. Thus, in the word \"son\" is included the Christian freedom by
virtue of which we have been liberated from Moses and from the office of
death.

However, this is to be understood in the spirit of the new man. The old
man is to remain under the law. About this matter, read Paul in the
epistles to the Romans and to the Galatians. The old man, because of the
remnants of sin in the flesh, shall be subject to the law until the day
he is laid in the grave. Throughout life he shall be guilty of death and
condemnation, and plagued by the thorns of an evil conscience, and so be
crucified, but for his own good. But for his own good, that he may be
put to death with his vices and evil desires. Therefore St. Paul says
\[2 Cor. 4, 16\]: \"Whether our outward man decays, yet the inward
man\", who is created in the image of God, \"is being regenerated day by
day\" 2c. The new man, however, who believes in the child who was born
to us and in the Son who was given to us, is the most free Lord and is
not subject to any law.

Therefore, the old man and the new man should not be mixed with each
other. The new man is not subject to the law, death and sin, but is a
free son of God, who is above the law, above sin, above death and above
hell. The yoke of burden, therefore, is not to press upon the new man,
but upon the old man, who is to die daily, that the sinful body may
cease \[Rom. 6:6.\] \"The body is dead because of sin,\" says Paul,
\"but the spirit is life because of righteousness\" \[Rom. 8:10\].
Because of the remnants of sin in the flesh, we are judged by the law,
condemned to death, and our fleshly life has no good conscience. But the
new man who believes in the Son is with the Son a Lord of all things, he
is a King and a Lord of lords; not in temporal and perishable things,
but in heavenly and eternal things; he is a Lord of death, of the law,
of sin, and of hell. When death terrifies me, or conscience troubles me,
I answer, Pack thyself, exercise thy dominion over the flesh, let the
soul be satisfied, and

182 L. xxm, 3S7-3SS. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 274-277.
183

the conscience in peace. You, O death, have no cause to frighten me; I
believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God. What right have you in this
one? What will you do to him? This one is given to me, and he is truly
the Son, who is the Deliverer, my freedom and liberation, my wisdom, my
redemption and my righteousness, 1 Cor. 1, 30. And Joh. 11, 25. and 14,
6. he himself testifies that he is the resurrection, the way, the truth
and the life.

So when the word \"son\" is explained according to its relation to us
(relative), it comforts us against the bondage of sin, death and hell.
Thus every Christian, as far as his outward man is concerned, is under
Moses or under the law, under death, hell and the devil; because the
outward or old man must still be crucified and put to death. But after
faith, the new man takes hold of the Son who is given to us, and is a
master of death, the law, hell and the devil, and can say, \"Death,
where is thy sting? Hell, where is your victory?\" \[1 Cor. 15, 55.\]
Thus, I say, he speaks according to the faith by which he believes in
the Son who is given to us. This is our freedom, which is purchased for
us through this King, through this Son, who is given to us, against the
bondage of the law 2c.

Therefore, a sharp and proper distinction must be made between Christ
and Moses, between the Son and the servant. The servant Moses is to be
put on the shoulder and on the back, that is, on the old donkey, the old
Adam, so that he may be killed and the body of sin may cease. But on the
new man the servant Moses shall not go up. For the servant Moses has no
right to the new man, because his kingdom is not there, which is a
kingdom of bondage, sin and death. This kingdom and office of death
shall remain in the flesh. In the new man is filiation, righteousness,
holiness, blessedness, redemption and eternal life.

201 Therefore, a Christian man is undaunted, and surely despises the
greatest and most abominable enemies, sin, death, hell, the devil, for
the sake of faith in Christ the Son who gave us life.

so that you can shame them and say: You death, what will you do to me?
What will you do to me? Will you bite me? I do not want to be bitten.
Will you accuse me of sin? I will not be accused. What do you want,
hell? Do you imagine that you will triumph over me? Rather, I will
triumph gloriously against you. You, devil, have no right over me
either; rage as much as you can, you will never make me your slave,
because I have been given a son; I am now under the kingdom of the son
who has brought with him the highest and everlasting freedom. Whose
kingdom is subject to none, for he is God\'s Son. He is not subject to
law or death for his person, but for our sake he went down into the pit.
He saith unto me, For thy sake I suffer these things. Believe in me.
\"He that believeth in me shall never die, though he were dead, yet
shall he live\" \[John 11:25, 26\]. This is being free from death. That
is the other contrast. So I take the son in his relation against the
servant, that is, against the yoke of burden, for the kingdom of
freedom.

Moreover, the prophet also wants to indicate with these words: \"A child
is born to us, a son is given to us\", that this King of Justice and
Prince of Peace is One Person, consisting of two natures, the divine and
the human. He is a child, born of his mother, the Virgin Mary, in time;
a Son, begotten of the Father from eternity. From this it follows that
this child born of the Virgin is at the same time the Son in the
Godhead; consequently, he is truly God and truly man.

In this entire prophecy, the prophet speaks of this son and child as
being the author of all that is promised here, that he has accomplished
and done everything. When the prophet says that the people sitting in
darkness have seen a great light, it is because of the goodness and work
of this King, who is the Son of God and the Virgin. That he says, \"You
have broken the yoke of their burden,\" must be understood by this son
and by this child, that he has done this, that he has broken our yoke.

184 L- xxm, 3SS-40I. More extensive explanation of Is. 9, 6. W. VI,
277-280. 185

enemies and these difficulties and overcame them. He did not do this
without the Father, but it is attributed to the Son that he did it and
put it into action, because this happened in the person of the Son.
Therefore, here the prophet expresses in the second word \"Son\" a
person in the Godhead. Thus, the King of this supreme freedom, the King
of the most free people, is the author, instigator and bringer of this
most free, meek, tranquil, pleasant and loving kingdom; this King, I
say, is the Son of God on high, and yet truly man, a child born of a
woman.

This order must be carefully preserved. We do not have to ascend to the
examination of the divine majesty before we have well grasped this
child, but one must ascend to heaven on this ladder that is presented to
us, one must make use of these steps that God has prepared and laid out
for this ascent. The Son of God did not want to be seen and found in
heaven, and therefore he descended from heaven into this lowliness, and
came to us in our flesh, and laid himself in his mother\'s womb and in
the manger, and was crucified. This is the letter he laid on this earth,
on which we were to ascend to God. You have to walk on this path. If you
rely on this way, and go down without speculating on this ladder about
the glory of the divine majesty, you will think up wonderful things that
are too high for you, but to your greatest detriment. Therefore, I give
you this reminder: Stay on this path, and use these letters, and do not
undertake to investigate that majesty.

The philosophers, especially the Platonists, make many imaginations of
the Godhead, how God is an intelligible being who governs the world and
is the cause of all good in nature. But since they wanted to be wise,
they finally became fools. For everything they said about God always
tastes like a dizzy imagination. And in this piece, all philosophical
schools have amply and clearly demonstrated their foolishness and
insipid nature.

Day. For they necessarily had to be crushed by this majesty, so that, in
seeking and investigating God, they lost God over it. For such questions
arose before them, which are inexplicable to reason, as: Why does God
act this way? Why does He rule the world this way? 2c. They undertook to
investigate and comprehend the manner of divine government by means of
reason, which, after all, does not agree with reason. Therefore they had
to become fools in their wisdom.

But if you do not want to start, first take hold of the child that is
born to us and do not take your eyes off him. Grow with him and
increase, and practice faith in him, then you will find God, then you
will be able to dissolve all questions of the eternal choice of grace,
which kill the carnal man. If you feel that you like the son, if you
delight in him, if he has become a little child to you, if you begin to
love him, then be confident, and be sure that you belong to the number
of the righteous, and that the Father has drawn you, not by a trait
recognizable to reason (metaphysico), by revelations and faces.

For the special revelations, raptures and visions, as the monks have had
such revelations and illuminations in the past, should not be believed.
The devil is often the author of these things, and he is such a powerful
spirit that he can very easily work and give the most lovely thoughts
that one would think one was among the angels 2c. However lovely they
may be, he nevertheless gives them into the heart with a far different
intention and for a different end purpose than one thinks. Surely such
thoughts and illuminations are outside the Son given to us. Many have
broken their necks here and have fallen into great danger because of it.

But I give counsel and remembrance that thou despise all these things,
and begin to become a child with the child, and a son with the son. Take
hold of this child who lies in the manger and in the womb of the mother.
Delight yourself in the same. If this son pleases you, if you have him,
if

186 L. XXIII, 401-403. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 280-282.
187

If you cling to him and remain firm, you cannot fail to follow the right
path, nor follow your own dreams, nor fall into any danger. With this
Son you have the heavenly Father, you have the Holy Spirit, you have the
angels and all creatures as friends. Yes, certainly no creature will be
able to cause you even the slightest harm. \"You will walk on lions and
vipers, and tread on young lions and dragons,\" Ps. 91:13. You are a
king and lord over other lords. What more do you ask? Therefore, let
this be your first concern, that you may take hold of this child; let
this be your highest command; the one who is born of the Virgin Mary,
and who is also the Son of God, press firmly to your heart. If you have
taken hold of this one, you are safe and well guarded against all
cunning attempts and dangerous plots of the devil. But if you put this
child, born of the Virgin Mary, out of your sight, and in the meantime
indulge in speculations in order to understand the Godhead, you will
never recognize God. Believe me in this, for I too have been in this
school, thinking that I was among the choirs of angels, when in fact I
was among the devils. Learn wisdom from my harm, and descend with the
Son, who has condescended to you for this reason, that you may recognize
God in him. \"Where I am,\" He says, \"there shall My servant be also\"
\[John 12:26\]. And this is also the intention of the following text:

**And his dominion will be on his shoulder** (or as the church sings:
**Which dominion is on his shoulder).**

209 In Hebrew the little word \"his\" does not stand. So this pronoun is
superfluous. And yet it comes to almost the same thing, only that it
reads more emphatically: And the dominion or the principality will be on
his shoulder, without putting the pronoun \"his\" to it.

Furthermore, this dominion is freedom itself, or this kingdom is free,
take it as a mere concept (abstractive) or in reality (concretive). And
it is the same word here of which we speak in the struggle of

Jacob\'s Gen. 32, 28, from which the word Israel and Sarah are also
derived. Sarah means to have the upper hand, to rule, to be victor. From
this is derived Misrah, which the prophet uses here; this word means a
kingdom, supreme power, dominion, triumph, victory, freedom, as St. Paul
calls it in the 4th, 5th and 6th chapters of the epistle to the
Galatians, where he deals with Christian freedom, looking back to this
passage of Isaiah, and considering each word most diligently, and thus
speaking: \"We are not the children of the handmaid, but of the free\"
2c. \[Likewise Cap. 5, 1: \"Stand therefore in liberty, that Christ may
set us free; and be not entangled again in the bondage of the yoke\" 2c.

211 There the apostle gives a very beautiful and truly apostolic
discussion of the two wives, Sarah, the free one, and Hagar, who is a
maidservant, and is servant with her children. Sarah gave birth to us
Saraitatem, that is, freedom, not freedom of the flesh or of external
things. For, as I have said, the old man must be under the yoke, that
is, under the law, sin, death and hell 2c. Here is burden and law, not
freedom, not dominion. The old man must be weighed down with this burden
of servitude, that he may be restrained, subdued, and crucified 2c. In
contrast, the new man has freedom over death, sin, law and hell. He is
not weighed down with the yoke of burden, he is not weighed down with
the rod of the shoulder, he is not driven with the rod of the driver.
For he believes and hopes that these are broken through the work of the
child that is born to us and the Son that is given to us, and of this
victory he joyfully enjoys. Thus this word Misrah agrees with the
preceding, namely, filiation, and with the text, v. 4.:. \"Thou hast
broken the yoke of their burden 2c.\" Accordingly, the text reads thus:

**A son is given to us, and freedom is on his shoulder.**

212\. this child and this son is such a lord, on whose shoulders is not
the

188 xxni, 4V3-4M. More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. W. vi,
282-28S. 189

He is not the yoke of the burden, the rod of the shoulder, the rod of
the driver, but the kingdom, that is, freedom, is on his shoulder. He
Himself bore our sins and made us free, being put under sin and under
the law for our sakes; He set us at liberty, He made us kings, lords,
\"freemen\" who are their own lords and autocrats (αυτοχράτορας),
Saracites, not Hagarites. Thus, accordingly, we are not Hagarenes, but
truly Sarenees or Saracenes. (If only this word had not come into abuse,
for the Turks boast of being Saracens, since they are nothing less than
what they boast of being). We are truly Saracens or Saracites, that is,
freedom itself, salvation, life, righteousness and dominion over sin,
death, hell and the devil.

But this freedom is on the shoulder of the Son who is given to us; it
has not been acquired by our powers or virtues. This Son was subjected
to death, sin, the law, the devil, hell, for our sake; for our sake He
became a servant of the law. So we are Misrah, which is freedom, for the
sake of the bondage that he himself endured for us, that he placed on
his shoulder, that he might take upon himself our sins and our burdens.
Thus it amounts to the same thing, may one understand by dominion either
the church or freedom. We are free and liberty, kings and the kingdom,
priests and the priesthood; but on his shoulder, that is, he himself has
brought about this liberty for us, not we.

Dear God, how very great things the prophet has summarized here in so
few words! How wonderfully he speaks! Freedom (he says) or dominion,
will be on his shoulder 2c. What we teach in many words is here
described by Isaiah in few, but very beautiful and very emphatic and
clear words, namely that Christ, the Son, is the Savior of the human
race. For this is the aim of all that he says. Therefore the Son came in
the flesh, that we might be free \[John 8:36\]. This is what the prophet
says with his words

which were, as I said, brief but emphatic.

Read St. Paul diligently, who uses the words of Isaiah gladly and often.
For he has been a good and diligent reader of Isaiah (*Isaista*). These
words: \"A son is given to us\"; likewise: Freedom is on his shoulder,
he has, as said, well and diligently considered and pondered, since he
in the letter to the Galatians, Cap. 4, 31, he says: we are children of
Sarah, the free, and therefore we should not and could not be subject to
the law 2c.

Therefore, when the law comes, shows sin, frightens and condemns us;
likewise, when sin threatens death, we can say: We are Saracens,
children and free; therefore, you, death, sin, law, Satan, have no right
over us and cannot harm us. This freedom was brought to us by the child
born for us and the Son given for us, in whom we believe. He put his
shoulders under for us, that we might be treaders and lords of the
devil, of death 2c. This kingdom is a kingdom of liberty and liberty
itself; but it is a liberty from sin, from law, from death, and from the
devil; it is not a liberty of the flesh, which the world is wont to
desire. And now even those who want to be considered evangelical rage
and rage when they are rebuked even a little, and cannot bear to hear
those who chastise and remind them. They want only freedom to be
preached, but vices and misdeeds not to be punished by us. According to
the new man, it is grievous to hear the teaching of the law; but to the
rude people, the old man, the ass, it must be preached. According to the
flesh you are in sins, in death 2c. No righteousness, no liberty shall
be preached to the flesh, but the rod of the driver shall be laid upon
it. Apart from faith, in the flesh, the law must be driven. For we are
to be corrected, that the body of sin \[may cease. This I have already
reminded in the foregoing, and it cannot be reminded enough, because of
the lust and willfulness of the flesh, which everywhere seeks freedom,
while yet it is subject to the law.

190 L. XXIII, 405-407. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 285-288.
191

must be morsed. You are free from the law as far as the new man is
concerned; you are not free from the law as far as the old man is
concerned, who must be under the rod of the driver, that he may be
killed. But over the new man this rod shall not rule, for he is free, is
a king and lord over sin, death and the devil, as I said, because of the
Son who is given to us, who has freedom from his shoulders.

Now when sin comes to afflict you, when the devil terrifies you, when
death hovers before your eyes, immediately show him the Son. And look on
this son with unblinking eyes; from him turn not thine eyes anywhere,
and say, I am Misrah, I am free: let me not be afflicted, take thee
away; thou hast no right in me. But if the law say, Nevertheless thou
art a sinner, therefore thou art guilty of death, answer him, I confess
this, and therefore it is lawful for thee to chasten me, but unto death
thou shalt not deliver me 2c. So also the born-again according to the
old man are under the harness of the driver, and have need of the
teaching of the law, remembrance and punishment. Just look at each one
of us and examine his life a little more closely, and he will see how
much he still lacks, how often he stumbles, how sluggish his flesh is
for good works, how far he still is from perfection 2c.

According to the flesh we are to be under the rod of the driver, the law
must chasten the flesh. But in the sadness of spirit, in the danger of
death, in the sensation of sins and hell, say: Lord driver, go and
exercise your ministry in the flesh. In the flesh you may torture and
torment me, I well deserve it, but let the inward and new man be
satisfied. I shall not despair. I should not despair. I may be troubled
(that is, the law and the evil conscience may frighten me), but I shall
not despair, for I shall remember the wounds of the Lord, says St.
Augustine. So also thou shalt say, Thou law, terrify and slay the flesh;
for that I have deserved; but in despair yet shalt thou not

lead. If I am troubled, I will not despair, I will not despair, but I
will remember this child, this Son, who is given to me and who is my
Misrah. I deserve to be afflicted and crucified by you; but because of
this I will not throw away the hope of salvation, I will not lose heart,
I will not deny the child born to us and the Son given to us. Therefore,
chastise and crucify me always, but in such a way that this cross may be
a salvific martyrdom for me, which is not for condemnation, but for the
death of the old man, and for the bringing to life of the new, 2 Cor. 4,
10. ff. Thus, the martyrs were subjected to various tortures, and their
bodies were killed, but the new man triumphed, because he was Misrah, he
was the freedom that is placed on the shoulder of this Son.

Now this is the Christian knowledge, and the highest wisdom, that we
know that we are sons, lords, and Saracens in the Spirit. In the spirit,
I say. The flesh may be subjected to the rod of the driver, that is, to
the law, it may be thrown into the fire, it may be tormented, it may be
punished while alive, it may be tortured and martyred in many ways; just
as we are indeed plagued daily by many temptations, miseries and
sorrows, so that the strength of our body is also weakened by them. But
because of this we will not run into danger. This thing will not harm
us, it will not bring us trouble, but it will be for the increase of our
glory. The Lord, this child, remains our son, Misrah, our kingdom, our
triumph and our victory. Through him we must necessarily be the very
freest masters, through him we use and enjoy the very freest freedom,
but according to the inward, not according to the outward man. According
to the flesh, this freedom does no good. The flesh must be under the
law, under the tormentors, the devils, 1) who must plague us at all
times, and also under evil men who torment us. These evils are part of
the driver\'s sting.

1\) Erlanger. 6iadoli, Wittenberger: äiadolis. We have followed the
latter reading.

192 **L. XXIII, 407-409.** more extensive explanation of Isa. **9, 6. W.
VI, 288-291.** 193

But Sara, the victory, the supremacy and the freedom, must be incumbent
and always be there, comforting and strengthening the new man, so that I
can say: No matter how much I may suffer, no matter how much I may be
tortured in the flesh, no matter how many hardships and miseries I may
have to contend with, the Lord lives and gives life to the Son who was
given to me and is my deliverer. Thus we read of a certain Roman citizen
who possessed great wealth that he was not only deprived of all his
goods but also sent into exile for professing the Christian religion;
which was indeed a great punishment and cross, especially for a Roman
accustomed to prosperity. But since he was deprived of all his goods and
expelled from his homeland, he consoled himself in this way, saying,
\"At least they shall not take Christ from me, though they take from me
my goods, my body and my life. An excellent word, worthy of a Christian.
He made a distinction between the stick of the driver and Misrah or 1)
the kingdom of this child.

\(221\) So also we shall be accustomed, and learn to say, when our flesh
is chastened: I shall indeed die, for the flesh must die, because I lie
under the burden according to the flesh; but though I die, yet shall I
not lose Christ, and shall enjoy the liberty which he hath purchased for
me for ever, and I shall be a Lord, I shall be a King, I shall be Misrah
2c. But let us go further, and hear the names of this King, which are
exceedingly full of comfort.

**And he is called Wonderful, Counsel, Power, Hero, Eternal Father,
Prince of Peace. 2)**

This passage in particular has been interpreted in many ways, even torn
apart. Yes, this whole text, which we have undertaken to treat, the Jews
have crucified miserably and in a shameful way. For just as the child
himself was crucified by them, so was he crucified by them.

1\) In the editions: st, for which should probably be read ant.

2\) In Latin: Dt voanbitur nornsn \[sus \^6rnirakilis, OonMiarius, Osus,
dortig, ?atsr astsrnus sVulg.: Mtsr tutürikrinasps xnais.

This passage and its scripture are also crucified by them daily. And
also our interpreters, as wholesome as they speak, treat this passage in
many ways. Jerome treats it coldly and shallowly. Lyra does as much as
he can, but he does not do justice to the text. We therefore see
ourselves compelled to examine the words of this passage with all the
greater attention and diligence, and to reflect upon them, and to bring
out a more certain and richer sense of them from the circumstances and
from the New Testament, as we have done above \[§ 98 ff.\] in explaining
the yoke, the rod, the plug, the war, the light, the peace 2c.

The Jews, the crucifiers of Christ, falsify and corrupt this passage in
the most shameful way. The prophet attaches six names to this child and
this son. The first five they read in the nominative, but the sixth in
the accusative, in this way: And he shall call his name, who is the
Wonderful, Counsel, GOD, the Strength, and a Father of eternity: a
Prince of Peace. This is a blatant blasphemy, and they understand it of
Hezekiah the king. But we have already said above 6. 7\] that it could
not be understood in this way. The text speaks of a prince born as a
little child, and of a son given, of an everlasting joy; as of the
conquest of death, of sin, of the law, and of a king whose reign shall
have no end; likewise that there shall be no end of peace. What then do
they bark against the manifest understanding of the word (grammaticam)?
Here also, as everywhere else, is their hideous wickedness revealed; for
as they crucified Christ, so they crucify also the words of his prophet.
There are, as I said, six different names, and yet they put the first
five in a different case than the sixth, and interpret them in this way:
This wonderful God 2c. will call this king Hezekiah a prince of peace.
Already from this it is evident that God has given them in a wrong
sense. The final wrath of God has truly come upon them.

224\. our interpreters and all Christians understand it from Christ, our
Savior, from

194 L. XXIII, 409-411. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 291-293.
195

which alone the prophet speaks. Some of the interpreters have connected
these six words in such a way that from them three compound names should
become, namely: a wonderful council, a strong God, an eternal father and
prince of the peace. Jerome thinks that there are six names, and rightly
so. And we also want to keep this opinion.

**Et vocabit \[And he will name\].**

Lyra argues that vocabitur \[he will be called\] should be read, and the
interpreters agree with him. And that these are names of the Messiah,
testifies also the Chaldean translation. But the newer Jews explain it
all, as I do

\[§ 6 f. § 223\] of the king Hezekiah. With the exception of these
blinded Jews, all interpreters agree with each other that it must be
understood of the Messiah, our Savior. The seventy interpreters read:
Whose dominion is on his shoulder, and he is called the angel of great
counsel; as is also sung in an introit. After that they add the other
names: Wonderful, Counsel, God, the Strong, the Mighty, the Prince of
Peace, the Father of the World to Come. And it is added: For I will
bring peace upon princes, and health unto him. But according to the
Hebrew it cannot be read thus. Now I do not know how it came to be that
they read or translated thus, or what they intended by it. Therefore I
leave this to the Hebrews to investigate.

226 But that one says, it is read in the Hebrew: He will call his name
(vocabit), and not, his name will be called (vocabitur), this is an
unfounded pretense of the rabbis. For it is known that an active verb is
often taken passively, or rather impersonally. For example: they will
give a measure, that is, it will be given; so also vocabit, instead of
vocabitur. And it is even common for impersonal things to be pronounced
by actives. It seems that the text is corrupted by those who put the
dots, who, instead of writing in the passive, wrote XXXXX. For the
letters,

Whether they are read with or without dots, they are the same, and the
grammar agrees with them. But the Jews, the most harmful people, often
falsify the sayings of the prophets with their dots and distinctive
signs, and their dots, which are a new invention after all, are supposed
to be more valid than the simple, genuine opinion, which agrees quite
well with the grammar. Therefore, I do not much care for these
grammatical superstitions of theirs. But, grammar is on our side, if the
right points are made. And the Jews themselves confess, as Lyra often
says, that they are not free to depart from the Chaldean translation.

Since the seventy interpreters and the Chaldean translator agree with us
that this text is to be understood by the Messiah, and that these names
are names of the Messiah, we have no reason to be anxious about the
points in this one word. We can be content with the fact that even the
Chaldean translator and the seventy interpreters agree with us.

What follows, then, are names that are actually attached to the Messiah.
And the distortion of the Jews does not take place, who say that these
names are said here by God Himself (that is, by the Father). For it is a
common image and manner of speaking to attach names to someone from his
offices or activities, although they are not proper names of the person,
as the grammarians call proper names.

**Wonderful.**

But there are six different names, of which I, although I have recently
treated them in a sermon, nevertheless also want to say a few things
here. The first name of this son or child born to us, he says, is Pele
\[XXX\], that is, \"Wonderful\". But who can explain the exceedingly
high majesty of this word by dignities? He is wonderful in everything,
and through everything. What is more wonderful than that God and man are
One Person? that He is the Son of God and Mary, and yet only One Son?
Who will ever and forever comprehend this mystery?

196 xxni, 411-414. more expansive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. W. vi,
293-2ss. 197

that God is man, that a creature is the Creator, and the Creator is a
creature? We will admire this mystery for eternity, even after this
life. Even the angels long to look into it, and yet they will never be
satisfied. We are blessed if we even believe these incomprehensible
things; but we will be even more blessed, yes, most blessed of all, when
we see them with our eyes, when faith will cease, when we will see Him
as He is, when we will be revealed with Him in glory, when we will be
given to see face to face that which we now see through a mirror in a
dark word \[1 Cor. 13:12\]. What is more wonderful than that a son is
born of a mother without a father, contrary to the common way of birth?
Who can explain these wonderful things about this person? I do not want
to discuss them here, nor do I want to dwell on the enumeration of them.
For the prophet actually speaks of the kingdom and the government of the
kingdom of the Messiah. Not only his person is incomprehensible, because
he is a son of God and a son of the virgin, but also all his works are
wonderful and incomprehensible. And most of all he looks at the word
Misrah. In his works and effects he is far more wonderful.

Lyra explains this word too lightly, for he says that he is called
miraculous because of the miracles he performed, which we find
distinguished in evangelical history. This is true, because even for
this reason he is not called \"miraculous\" without rhyme. But the
miracles do not actually belong to his kingdom. The dominion (misrah) is
not on his shoulders; he was still a servant and a minister of the
circumcision; he was not yet sitting at the right hand of God when he
did these miracles.

But far greater and more admirable miracles he performed after he
ascended into heaven. There he triumphed over the prince of the world
and the god of this world, and over hell. Likewise, he broke the yoke of
the burden, the rod of the shoulder, the rod of the driver. These are
far greater miracles. And these he works still now, and they will
continue, so

long as this child and this son will last, and will never cease. He will
be miraculous forever; he will never cease to work miracles that are far
more miraculous than the miracles he worked when he gave sight to the
blind, healed the sick, and the like. For these are the greatest
miracles of all, that he quickeneth souls by his word, that he
quickeneth our bodies at the last day, that he baptizeth us in his
blood, and thereby washeth away sins, that he daily taketh away the
spoil of hell, of death, of sin, of the law, and this spoil ceaseth not.
And this he does with marvelous ease, and without the least difficulty,
by the mouth of Peter, Paul, and other apostles, and now by our mouth,
who are in the preaching ministry, and in case of need by the mouth of
all Christians, only by saying: I absolve you from sins, I open heaven
to you, I kill the devil. Is this not wonderful? Not only is the person
of Christ wonderful, but his works, which continue forever, are no less
wonderful. 2c.

Not only the works he did himself, but also those he did through his
servants were far greater than those he did in his own person. He raised
the dead, he healed the sick 2c. He did this when he was still a servant
and not yet transfigured, and when the Holy Spirit was not yet given.
But after the Holy Spirit is given, much greater works are done. For
after the Holy Spirit is given, He breaks into the whole world as it
were with a storm; He speaks with the tongues of all nations, and not
only casts out devils, but also casts out the devil from his kingdom,
and breaks the yoke of the burden, the rod of the shoulder, the rod of
the driver, as in the days of Midian; then the pitchers were broken, the
trumpets were blown, the enemies were smitten and slain. He ascended on
high, he received gifts for men, he led captivity captive \[Ps. 68,
19.\]. These are truly wonderful things and the highest miracles, that
such a stronger came over the strong, and took away his robbery \[Luc.
11, 22.\], and that with very easy effort, namely by the word alone,

198 L. XXIII, 414-416. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 298-299.
199

and by the ministry of a man, either a minister of the Word, or of any
Christian in case of need. The world does not know these miracles, as
Christ himself says: \"He will give you another Comforter, whom the
world cannot receive, for it does not see him \[John 14:17\]. We go to
the sermons, we are baptized, we are absolved, and thus die in faith in
Christ, and are still alive when we have died. These greatest miracles,
that we live as the dying, no one sees. Horses and mouths do not see
that the Holy Spirit is present and that he works here, and that he
makes the believers alive and comforts them, but a believer sees this.
Likewise, that a child born again through baptism has been placed in the
bosom of God, has become a child and heir of God and co-heir with
Christ, this the world does not see, but only the Holy Spirit in the
believer sees these miracles. And it is of these miracles that Isaiah
actually speaks when he calls Christ Pele, that is, \"Wonderful\".

233 But also for other reasons this King and this Child is and is
rightly called \"Wonderful\", namely, because he leads his saints
wonderfully, Ps. 4:4, because he rules us wonderfully. We die, and
behold, we live; as the deceivers, and yet true; as the unknown, and yet
known; as the chastened, and yet not slain; as the sorrowful, and yet
always rejoicing; as the poor, and yet making many rich; as having
nothing, and yet having all things, 2 Cor. 6:8-10. The world flourishes,
and we wither; the world reigns and triumphs, and we perish. Thus
everything happens in the church in a miraculous way, both in what it
does and what it suffers.

Rath.

Thus he is also a \"council\". Lyra thinks that Christ is called a
\"council\" by the prophet because he would have added councils to the
commandments of the two tablets of the law. But to say this is unworthy
of a divine scholar, yes, of every Christian man. You should completely
and utterly reject this opinion of the schools of the evangelical
counsels.

even condemn. I, too, have published a disputation note (scheda) 1) of
the twelve evangelical counsels, because in my time this theology was
very common. And John Hus defended it at the Concil of Costnitz. It was
very common in all schools, but it is a very harmful and pernicious
doctrine. For it annihilates the teaching of the Gospel and the Law.

The papists do not want to recognize that they have introduced errors,
abuses, idolatrous worship, many false and godless doctrines into the
church. \"No one now wants to have the water muddied.\" Now no one among
them has provided anything, no one is aware of any guilt. They accuse us
fiercely and blame us for having eradicated all discipline, and boast
that they have the discipline. But if the papacy had sinned nothing more
than that it had invented these counsels and introduced them into the
church, it would already have deserved, with this single crime, to be
thrown into the utmost hell, into eternal fire. That is why I have
gathered these counsels, so that they would be present in the Church for
and for, and would remain in our memory, and so that we would thank God
for the great light that has now dawned upon us.

\(236\) That Lyra now says that Christ is called \"counsel\" because he
added evangelical counsel to the commandments, that is, because Christ
made counsel out of the strictest commandments, in this he is terribly
mistaken. For this is an appalling and utterly ungodly doctrine, taken
from the Talmud, that one makes counsels out of the fifth chapter of
Matthew, that is, that they

1\) This writing is found in the Latin Wittenberg edition (1550), tona.
I, col. 4096; in the Latin Jena (1579), tona. I, toi. 525 b; and in the
Erlanger, opp. vnr. arx., tom. IV, p. 450. it belongs to the year 1540.
Walch seems to have overlooked it. It should have been inserted in the
tenth volume as an appendix to Luther\'s \"Disputation on the words of
Christ: Go and sell all that you have, and give it to the poor\" in the
old edition Col. 691 (in our edition vol. X, Col. 585); we will add it
in its time, about the 21st volume at the end of the collection of
letters.

200 **L. xxiii, 4i6-ti8.** More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. **W.
vi, 299-302.** 201

say that a man can be saved without these commandments, and that it is
not necessary for a man to keep them if he does not want to become
perfect, that is, a monk. And they divide the church into perfect and
imperfect Christians. The imperfect they refer to the Ten Commandments,
saying that they must keep them, and teach that those who keep the Ten
Commandments will be saved. But the perfect, they say, must keep the
counsels which, according to them, Christ taught in the fifth chapter of
Matthew, namely, that one should not be angry with his brother, that one
should love his enemies 2c. For, they say, who can love the enemies?
This is the scholastic, yes, in truth the devilish theology. These
cursed errors were brought to us by the Pabst and the Sorbonne in Paris.
Nevertheless, they do not want to recognize any of these errors. Among
these counsels they also include chastity, Matth. 19, 12: \"Whoever can
grasp it, let him grasp it.\" That was a frightening darkness.

In this darkness and error, as I have said, was the holy martyr John
Hus, but the fire and the blood cleansed him from this error, as
Augustine says of Cyprian: His exceedingly beautiful confession of
Christ has swallowed up this error of his from rebaptism; so also the
error of Saint John Hus. But it is of good use that you remember such
abominations, that you guard against them, and give thanks to God that
we are delivered from them, and that you may have something to oppose
the papists, who proudly act and insist on their church, so that they
may boast a little more modestly, and not think that they are free from
all guilt, and have never sinned in any way against the church of
Christ. For what do they want to say? How can they excuse themselves?
With what color do they want to gloss over this evil and ungodly error,
that they have made twelve evangelical counsels against the revealed
word of God? What did they regard the Gospel as other than the
commandments of Moses, which are in fact quite the same as those in the
Talmud?

**\[Refutation of the doctrine of the twelve evangelical vengeances.\]
1)**

238 Christ says: \"You have heard that it was said to the ancients,
\'You shall not kill; but whoever kills shall be guilty of judgment. But
I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother shall be guilty
of judgment. And whosoever saith unto his brother, Racha, is guilty of
counsel. But he that saith, Thou fool, is guilty of hell fire\" \[Matt.
5:21, 22\]. Truly, these are not advice, but commandments. He does not
give advice in such a way that it is up to us to do it or not to do it,
but he seriously commands that we should do it. And yet these clumsy
theologians say quite the opposite, that Christ does not speak by
commandment but by counsel, or that he gives counsel, and that it is
lawful to be angry, and that a man may be saved even if he does not keep
it. This is only commanded or advised by Christ to those who strive to
be perfect.

The Talmudists and the teachers of the Law, the scribes, taught similar
things. The law says: You shall not kill. Here they have said: Occides
\[thou shalt not kill\] is a verb in the singular, and denotes One
Person. Therefore, if three or more persons kill one person, they do not
sin. And this is not forbidden, for it is not written: You shall not
kill; but, \"You shall not kill,\" which is only for One Person. Our
jurists are almost also such Talmudists in their glosses. But I remind
them that they must not continue to be such people, and that they must
give way to Christ, to whom all must give way, and whose teaching alone
we should and must reverence. Further, just as the Talmudists have
nefariously falsified and circumvented the commandment of Christ by the
singular, so they have done the same in the interpretation of the word
\"to kill.\" For they have explained the word thus: \"To kill\" is to
stab someone with one\'s own hand, or to murder; therefore hatred and
treason are not sins, or it is permissible to hate someone.

1\) This heading is found in the Wittenberg edition.

202 L. xxm, N8-420. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 302-305. 203

Or to betray. Thus Saul handed David over to the Philistines \[1 Sam.
18, 21\], and yet did not mean that he sinned against the divine law;
Christ was betrayed by Judas. The Jews, the crucifiers of Christ, put
this blame far away, since they said to the apostles in the Book of
Acts: \"You want to bring this man\'s blood upon us\" \[Acts 5:28\]. As
if they wanted to say: we did not kill him, but Pilate 2c. So when Peter
accused them that they had killed Christ, they denied it, that they had
not killed him, but that he had been handed over to Pontius Pilate,
because they thought that they did not commit a death stroke when they
caused someone to be killed, and thought that killing was nothing else
than someone killing another with his own hand.

Thus they have falsified the commandments of God, just as our scholastic
theologians have made counsels out of the clear commandments of Christ.
Because Lyra has given me cause to speak of this, I have here casually
wanted to say something about it and inculcate it, so that you may have
an abomination of this godless scholastic teaching. Christ expressly
says and commands in clear words to all the godly, he does not merely
give counsel \[Matth. 5, 20.\]: I say to you: \"Unless 1) your
righteousness is better than that of the scribes\" 2c. Likewise \[v.
19\]: Whoever dissolves one of these least commandments 2c. Likewise
\[v. 44 ff.\], \"Love your enemies 2c. that ye may be the children of
your Father which is in heaven. For if ye love them that love you, what
reward shall ye have? Do not the publicans do the same? 2c. Therefore be
ye perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.\"

241 Are these not quite clear commandments? And yet the lovely people
have taught the opposite, namely, that men could be saved even though
they were not perfect, because Christ commanded them not to all men, but
only to the perfect, that is, to the monks. Surely Christ speaks these
words to his disciples, that is, to all believers, with whom he reminds
them that their righteousness should be better.

1\) Erlanger: niüit instead of: nisi.

The Pharisees and scribes thought, as I said, that they were keeping
this commandment and were righteous if they did not kill anyone with
their hands. They did not think that in this commandment, \"Thou shalt
not kill,\" it is commanded not only with the hand, but also with the
mouth, with the tongue, and with the heart, to abstain from striking
death. Therefore, since Christ exhorts His own to be perfect, He takes
the Pharisees and Talmudists to task, who distinguish the commandments
according to works, according to the heart, and according to the tongue.
And they say: One does not sin by hatred, envy and malicious gossip
against the commandment: Thou shalt not kill, but when you put your hand
to it, and kill someone with the sword or projectile. Thus they
interpret the commandments of the Lord as they please.

They do the same in many other things. And they are not ashamed to
approve even such shameful deeds, which are against nature and should be
cursed, with their blasphemous glosses. The rabbis read: Vir habet
potestatem in concubitibus mulieris. Because the word concubitibus is
plural, these impure and shameful people interpret it thus: Husbands
have power to abuse their wives, according to nature and against nature.
Who should doubt that these kind of people have been completely taken in
and driven by the devils themselves, who have not been ashamed to deal
with such abominable shameful deeds even in writings? I wish that the
Fortalicium Fidei would be printed again, in which such things are
collected more. Likewise, as they hold that one does not sin against the
fifth commandment if one does not strike death with the fist; so they
also say that one does not sin against the sixth commandment if one
sleeps with an adulteress or a stranger\'s wife, and does not enjoy the
pleasure demanded 2c. So also our theologians, or rather useless
chatterers (mataeologi), the lovely people, have begun to teach that
simple fornication is not a sin, because Terence said: It is not an
offence for a young person to commit fornication. O, what a godless,
shameful, shameless and cursed word is this, that fornication should be

204I1 . XXIII, 420-422. More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. W. vi,
305-307. 205

which is publicly condemned by the Holy Spirit who clearly says \[1 Cor.
6, 9. 10.\] that fornicators will not inherit the kingdom of God;
likewise Hebr. 13, 4. that God will judge them 2c.

These are excellent counsels, namely of the pabstics, by which they have
introduced detestable sins and vices. And since the false interpretation
of Lyra gave me the opportunity to speak about these counsels, I have,
as I said, only wanted to point out this error above, in order to remind
you to curse it seriously and to shut the mouths of the adversaries, who
have introduced this abominable and ungodly error into the church, and
yet do not want to confess their error or acknowledge their guilt,
although they have nothing to answer and with which they can excuse
themselves or defend this abominable error. Through this teaching, the
gospel together with the law has been abolished and transferred to the
monks, who, God willing, could only keep the counsels. Thus they
crucified the Word of God and took away the sun, Christ the Savior, from
the world. This shameful deed should be brought before them when they
boast of their impure perfection. And this is not a minor offense, but
an outrage so terrible and beyond measure that the Turk has not
committed nor can commit a more serious sin against Christ, and that a
Turk is better than those who have introduced this abominable error from
the evangelical counsels.

So Christ is not called \"Counsel\" here because he gave the twelve
counsels, as Lyra interprets it, who is completely wrong, but he is
called \"Wonderful\" and \"Counsel\" because of his wonderful,
exceedingly good, high, excellent and salutary counsels, with which he
helps his members. For after a person is miraculously saved from the
power of the devil through the Word and baptism, and becomes a Christian
(which is the miraculous work of Christ), much strife and struggle
immediately follows, many and varied difficulties arise, we are
confronted with many

We are plagued by temptations, which are sometimes of such a nature that
they wear down the heart and are so hard on us that we even want to get
tired of life. And especially bishops and pastors who are in the public
teaching office have to endure a lot of these difficulties and
temptations. They are forced to take upon themselves the heaviest
burdens; they are often so attacked and afflicted that they are not far
from despair, and that there is no help and counsel left for them
anywhere in the world. Then this \"counsel\" of ours, Christ, is
immediately present, and gives counsel.

The Arians, Pelagians, and similar people are rising up, and they are
disturbing and shaking the church so terribly that it seems as if
everything will fall over the heap. But Christ, this council, lives. He
is present with the power of the Holy Spirit, and through it sustains
his own, helps them, and through it gives them divine wisdom,
exceedingly salutary counsel, the most cogent and insurmountable grounds
of proof, the most powerful solutiones against all the gates of hell, so
that the heretics and the fools are put to shame; and he does not cease
to cast out the devil, to crush his head, and to give him up to
laughter. Thus he stands by his own with his counsel, and preserves his
church when it seems to run the greatest danger and is already close to
ruin.

246 But also the temptations of each individual cause us no little
trouble. I am speaking especially of the temptations of the spirit,
namely of mistrust and despair, where the godly are challenged to the
point of death and hell. When we have to struggle with these
temptations, special counsel and help is needed. Then one cries out, and
should cry out: Now help me, O Lord Christ, with your powerful counsel
and help! When we struggle in this way, he does not leave us, but stands
by us as a counselor. Then the Holy Spirit gives us counsel either
through a brother or by holding up a word of Scripture. I have had
unspeakable trials in which no creature could advise me. But although I
have been deprived of all human counsel and

206 L. XXIII, 422-424. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 307-310.
207

I was not abandoned by this council, which found ways and means in all
adversities and assisted me in all difficult cases with its powerful and
wonderful counsel.

Just as I have said that the first name, \"Wonderful,\" refers to faith
and to the new creation through which we become Christians through His
miracles, so this name, \"Counsel,\" refers to suffering and to the
cross, which teaches us to pray and to approach God for help and
counsel. For the cross itself teaches us that this child is the
counselor, or that he alone can advise us in all our needs. Thus it is
said in the 16th Psalm, v. 7: \"I praise the Lord, who has given me
knowledge\"; in Hebrew it is written: \"who has given me counsel. Thus
we learn from experience that he alone can advise. And when he has given
us counsel, we praise and extol him, according to the example of David.

So many temptations befall a man who is redeemed and born again through
the miracles of Christ that it is impossible for him to endure if he is
not always strengthened by new counsel from this Counselor. This could
be illustrated very nicely by our own examples. And, not to say anything
about our own person (privatis), with how many and how bitter pains,
with how heavy temptations, and with what great sorrows do you think
that our hearts have been martyred because of the disturbances and
upsets which have been aroused in the church by the Sacramentans, by the
Anabaptists and rebellious peasants in our times. But also in this this
true council has stood by us with its advice. He has also stood by his
church at all times. When Arius, Pelagius and others troubled and
disturbed the church to such an extent that everything seemed to be lost
and to be finished, this son of God, this one and only councilor, found
miraculous counsels that the church rose again, and the godly, since
they cried out to him and asked him for counsel and help, were saved
from all distress.

249\. so this name \"counsel\", as I have said, refers to the
tribulations and to the cross, which teaches us to pray, and to call
upon this our King, counsel and help from

ask him. When it comes to the point that everything seems to be lost,
when we are surrounded by such great dangers and difficulties that we
think it is all over, we should not despair; but we should lift up our
eyes to the mountains, as the 121st Psalm, v. 1, teaches; from there
counsel and help will come to us quickly.

I have many examples of this experience, both public and particular. My
affairs have often come to this, more than once my troops have been
driven into such a tight corner, to use the words of the comic poet; I
have been surrounded by such great hardships that it now seemed to be
over; that it seemed as if, since things were so bad, no counsel, no
help could help and advise: nevertheless, this most excellent counsel
has found the most excellent advice. I have had temptations that I
thought no man on earth had, and I have debated with St. Paul (and I
still enjoy this debate) what his stake or thorn in the flesh was, with
which he was crucified, and the blows with which he was beaten by the
devil. \[And I have sometimes been so arrogant that I thought I could
dispute with him about it, or that I had endured as great, as severe and
as manifold trials as he himself had endured (because it is thought that
the stake in the flesh and the blows were temptations to despair). In
such great difficulties, in such severe temptations, there would never
have been a remedy nor counsel if Christ had not come and opened the
Bible to me and counseled me with His word and comforted me. Thus (as
Paul says in 2 Cor. 1:3, 4) God comforts us in all our tribulations,
that we may comfort them also which are in all tribulations.

Therefore, this second name \"council\" is a very appropriate name for
this child, and it is a name of office, which belongs to him alone,
truly and peculiarly. For no one can assist the church with a more
powerful and better council, even in the most difficult needs, than this
council.

208 XXIII, 424-426. extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. W. VI, 310-313.
209

252 The faithful often fall into various temptations from which they
cannot escape, where there seems to be no salvation or hope left. But in
these troubles they are not abandoned by their counsel. He finds
remedies for all ills, gives good counsel everywhere, and makes the
temptation come to an end in such a way that they can bear it \[1 Cor.
10:13\]. And he stands by them, so that they do not succumb, but that
they wriggle out of all difficulties, and, gloriously saved, triumph. If
he did not do this, the faith that was produced and awakened in man by
these miracles would be shaken and would have to succumb. Therefore he
finds counsel in all dangers and temptations, and such a wonderful
counsel that the saved must say: I would not have thought that it would
turn out like this; neither I nor any man\'s wisdom could have found
this counsel. This is what we must always confess when we have
experienced God\'s counsel. And that is why God sometimes allows us to
be involved in such great difficulties and to be besieged with such
great temptations, in which no human wisdom can advise or help, so that
He may show that His wisdom is far greater than all wisdom, cunning,
cunning and power, even of the gates of hell.

Therefore you have no reason to despair of help and counsel in any
difficulty or challenge, no matter how difficult it is. He has wanted to
be called counselor; he has the name from the deed, and wants to and can
counsel alone in all tribulations, dangers and miseries. Nor must you
think that you alone have suffered such things as no one else has
suffered. \"Know,\" says Peter, \"that these same afflictions are upon
your brethren,\" 1 Pet. 5:9. Therefore, always remember that similar
afflictions, no less severe than yours, have been suffered by other
godly people. I have often been plagued with these temptations, so that
I thought no one had endured such severe ones, and yet I was mistaken in
this, although I believe that few have to struggle with such hard
temptations.

254\. certainly suffer the pope and the

Bishops have none of these temptations with which the godly are plagued.
The reason they rely on is their wealth, power and glory. And because
they are not afflicted by any hard and true temptations, they can
therefore bear no true desire for the counsel and help of this counsel
2c. So when God deprives us of the foundation of our wisdom and trust,
and when He leaves us suspended between heaven and earth, then we learn
to pray in truth, and to take refuge in this counsel. Then we cry out: O
JEsu Christe, thou counsel of thy church, stand by us, create help for
us 2c.

And we also experience the counsel of this advice, and have already
experienced it at these times, also often in physical challenges. How
often have our adversaries, now for more than twenty years, thought to
suppress us completely? But all their attempts and undertakings have
been in vain, which we have to thank to our counsel, who has advised us
in this, and has frustrated the attempts and undertakings of the
adversaries. Thus we learn in all special and public difficulties and
challenges that this child and our king is indeed what he is called,
namely the true \"council\", which is his second name.

Now let us also look at the third name of this child and son, which is
El. I do not pretend to be a Hebrew; but it is certain that this word El
derives from strength, and it means God Himself, if it is a name, as
here. And it is one of the ten names of GOD. Just as Adonai, Jehovah,
Tetragrammaton are names proper to GOD, so El is nowhere found in the
singular except from the true GOD; as Ps. 42, 3: \"My soul thirsts for
\"El\", that is, for the strong one. And Ps. 50, 1.: \"GOD the LORD, the
mighty one speaks.\" But still, if one may say appellatively \"the
strong one\", or \"GOtt\", one sees that it denotes a proper name of
GOtt, and it comes to the same thing. But I would rather have it said:
\"God\", although the word \"God\" does not express the name of
strength.

210 xxin, 426-42S. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 3is-3i6. 211

brings. For we understand by this word nothing else than the Godhead
itself, which is over all. But the Hebrew word El in the singular
denotes God in such a way that it also indicates the original
derivation, namely a strong one. And this strength is not the active
strength that is spoken of in the following word Gibbor, but an
independent being (substantiva substantia), which by its nature is
firmness or strength, as He is called a strong, solid rock, on which one
can rely with certainty and security. That is why we have given it
\"strength\" in our German translation. For what is not weak and feeble
in itself, but exists in its strength and firmness for itself, that the
Hebrews prove with this word \"El\". And this is actually the meaning of
this strength. GOD is this strong one, that is, the independent
firmness, and the insurmountable and lasting strength.

When the temptation is over, when we are saved by the counsel of this
child and counsel, when the temptation, as Paul says, has come to an
end, then, I say, he is Elim to us, so that we can endure it \[1 Cor.
10:13\]. Then we become Elim \[strong\], that is, Christ is then truly
God in us, by virtue of his essential strength, with which he
strengthens us, as Paul says; so that as such who are strengthened,
invigorated and established \[1 Pet. 5, 10.\], we can endure all evil
2c.

When he works faith through the Word and the Sacraments, he is
\"Wonderful\"; when we are protected and saved by his counsel, he is
\"Counsel. But he is \"El\" when he establishes us, makes us firm,
strong and sure, like a rock, and fills us with the joy of faith.

Here we see that the benefit of temptations is exceedingly great. For if
we are patient in tribulation, and strengthen our courage by
steadfastness against all adversity, experience follows from this
patience, that is, a man who has been tested becomes certain and firm,
that he does not doubt, is not uncertain, does not waver, that he is not
sad and uncertain, not fearful and anxious, not as he was before in the
fierce temptation; but he himself also becomes altogether El, strong;
but

through this child, who strengthens him with his help and counsel, so
that he can endure and bear all adversity. Paul says in 2 Cor. 12:7 ff:
\"I have been given a stake in the flesh, that is, the angel of Satan,
who smites me with fists,\" that is, Satan torments, boils, parches,
roasts, torments and tears me to pieces. By these words he indicates
that the affliction or temptations with which he has been afflicted have
been exceedingly severe and hard. But what is he doing in this struggle
and strife? He waits for this counsel. \"For this,\" he says, \"I have
thrice confessed unto the Lord, that he departed from me. And he said
unto me, Let my grace be sufficient for thee: for my power is mighty in
the weak.\"

This is what the prophet says here, that he is El. As if he wanted to
say: In this weakness of yours, in which you ask for advice, I give you
this comfort: Let it suffice you that you are a dear Paul to me, that I
love you, that you have my grace. It is also useful to thee that thou
art thus beaten with fists, lest thou exalt thyself. This weakness of
yours will not be your undoing, you will not be thrown away from me
because of it, that you suffer and are \'crucified\'; because of it I do
not love you less, because of it you will not run any danger, nor
succumb, but through this weakness of yours my power becomes mighty,
that is, in this weakness of yours I become El; here I prove that I am
in fact what I am called: here I display my power and strength, and make
you strong and firm in this way, so that you become stronger and
stronger.

261 These are the works of our King in his Church. He wonderfully
justifies and reigns in faith; then He gives counsel, comforts and saves
the believers in the trials through which He wants to exercise them;
then He establishes, strengthens and fortifies them, and also wants to
fully prepare, establish, support, strengthen and fortify those who have
only suffered a little while (as Peter says, 1 Pet. 5, 10.), so that we
will persevere until the end.

Thus also the third word \"El\" actually refers to the office of the
child, although it is also indicated throughout that the person is true
God.

212 **um. 429-431.** More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. **W. vi,
3, 6-319.** 213

**Hero.**

The fourth name is Gibbor. But Gibbor is actually bravery in war, or
warlike bravery, not according to its essence, but an active bravery
that shows its strength, attacks the enemy, and tears down, devastates,
destroys everything that opposes it and cannot be resisted 2c. Gibbor is
therefore as much a strong man of war, an excellent commander, an
unconquerable hero, a Hercules and Achilles; not through an essential
bravery and strength that remains in him, but which bursts forth, and
soon here and soon there, into a numerous enemy army that devastates
everything around it, throws a fit, drives it into flight, knocks it
down, and throws it over the heap. Thus it is said of Nimrod \[Gen.
10:9\] that he was a strong hunter, that is, a tyrant who devastated
everything around and subdued it. Thus Gibborim are called the strong
heroes of David, the princes and army leaders.

In short, Gibbor is called one who is gifted with manly and great
courage, who proves himself to be a man who is not only brave in and of
himself, but who in an active way displays his bravery and strength, who
can magnificently avenge himself on his enemies, and subdue and keep in
check their will of courage, undertakings, wild nature and insolence,
and bravely drive back injustice and violence that have either already
been done or are intended.

Such a Gibbor is Christ, this child and our King in the Church. Where he
is miraculous, counsel, strength to the godly, he also becomes Gibbor,
\"a warrior\", a very strong and unconquerable warrior and fighter, a
Hercules and Achilles. For he fights and wages wars against the vile
parties, against the heretics, against the devils, against the tyrants,
and against all the vices of the flesh, with which Christians have to
contend daily. For even though I do not quarrel with heretics, I am not
in deep peace because of it: Peace, but I feel another law, which is
contrary to the law in my mind, and takes me captive \[Rom. 7:23\]. Here
there must certainly be a dispute, and a sharp one at that. For this is
not a war of men asleep and idle.

and who do not feel the ministry of the law, and the terror of sin and
death, but it is a war of such people who fight against doubt in faith,
against the weakness of hope, against the fiery darts of the devil,
against the guile of heretics. These are not easy meetings or
contemptible fights. Now when we fight here, our Gibbor stands by us. He
fights in us by his spirit for us, and puts our enemies to flight, and
destroys them 2c. So this king is also an almighty fighter.

266 And as he is the greatest and most powerful king and hero, so he has
not contemptible enemies against him, but the most ferocious and fierce,
namely great and innumerable heaps of devils, heretics, wicked men,
tyrants and persecutors, and the great armies of our vices.

Furthermore, this child and this son in his own are not only contending
against the flesh, but he is also contending with the wisdom of the
world, 2 Cor. 10:5, and against the wisdom of our flesh, which contends
against the Spirit, that it may deprive us of the faith, that it may put
the teachers to sleep and make them secure, until Satan subdues them.
Against this wisdom of the flesh and of the world, and against the other
enemies of the church, this king and this child contend. And this he
does not once or twice, but forever. For from the beginning and forever
his name is Gibbor.

**Eternal Father.**

The fifth name is Abi-Ad \[XXXXXX\], that is, an eternal father, or
rather EwigVater. The Hebrew little word Ad does not actually mean
aeternum, but Ultra Ultra, in German: \"fort und fort\". So in Latin it
could actually be given: Perpetuo Pater.

But he calls him so, so that he shows that the kingdom of Christ is not
only established for one human life or age, but perpetual, and which
would last forever, \"which will go on and on\". Accordingly, this king
and child is an everlasting father in this life, that is, he is always
begetting children and multiplying them, not like David, Solomon, or any
other worldly king who had children for about twenty years.

214 L. XXIII, 431\^33. interpretations On the Prophets. W. VI, 320-322.
215

which is a very short time, after which they die. But this king of ours
is such a father, who begets children, not for twenty, thirty, or a
hundred years, but forever, even to the end of the world.

And this father begets such children, who live forever. Therefore, his
kingdom is a different kingdom from earthly things and a different power
from earthly things. From the beginning of the world he has had his
children, from that time until the end of the world his church will
always be preserved. In the New Testament, children are baptized daily
and believers are born through the gospel. Thus, this Father begets His
children through the Word and the Holy Spirit from Holy Baptism,
Absolution and the Sacrament of the Altar. And these his children do not
die. They fall asleep in faith in this Child and in this Son, and are
consumed by worms; but they do not remain in death, but rise again, are
gathered to the elect people, and live forever.

The Jews dream that the King Messiah, like King Solomon, will die with
his children. And also by this their frightening blindness is revealed,
and how 1) they do not understand anything in the prophets. Even from
this word, Abi-Ad, they could understand that this king would be
eternal, if they were not completely blinded, hardened, and given over
to a wrong mind. But if he will be father forever, it follows that he
will remain father forever, begetting children forever, until that day
of the return of all things; and his children, like the father, will
also remain forever 2c. Likewise, since his kingdom is a kingdom of
liberty, and not of bondage, he begets no servants, as Moses begat them
under the law, but he is a father above and apart from the law, and
consequently his children are not servants, but free, and heirs of God,
and joint heirs with this king and this child. Therefore Paul says Gal.
3, 28: Here is no servant 2c.

272\. Thus the Misrah \[reign\] of our King is a kingdom of the children
and of the

1\) Erlanger: liuanaanam instead of: Hunnius.

highest and eternal salvation, because he broke the yoke of their
burden, the rod of the shoulder, and the rod of the driver. So there is
a kingdom or dominion over sin, death and hell 2c. And this kingdom
endures forever. For though they die which are begotten of this Father,
as I have said, and depart from this life according to the body, yet in
his time they shall be raised again from the dead, that they may live
for ever, and be the children and heirs of GOD, and joint heirs with
Christ. Thus Christ says Joh. 11, 25: \"I am the resurrection and the
life; he who believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live\" 2c.

**Friede-Prince.**

This is the sixth name. But it speaks of a peace that shall have no end.
For if the father is everlasting, if the children are everlasting, and
if the kingdom is everlasting, peace must also be everlasting. Certainly
the king Hezekiah was not such a king, of whom the Jews understand these
words. His kingdom was not like that. For what kind of peace was there
under King Hezekiah? Either none at all, or a very small one. Therefore,
it cannot be understood by anyone other than this child born to us and
Christ the King, who alone reigns in peace.

Furthermore, where death, sin and the law remain, there is no peace from
the yoke of the burden, from the rod of the shoulder, from the rod of
the driver. These do not let the soul and the conscience be quiet. The
world has its peace, the carnal and godless people live in the highest
security, happiness and peace, but all their supports, on which they
rely and put their trust, are uncertain, transient, and last for a
moment. Therefore Job speaks Cap. 21, 12: \"They grow old in good days,
and scarcely for a moment are afraid of hell.\" On the other hand, the
people of this child and this son will enjoy a constant, blissful and
everlasting peace, because their king is a prince of peace, and of such
peace that there will be no end 2c.

**216** xxm, 4W\^t3s. More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 6. 7. W. vi,
322-325. **217**

But here, and in all passages of the Holy Scriptures, where the kingdom
of Christ is proclaimed as an eternal and peaceable kingdom, it must be
noted that the future resurrection of the dead and eternal life are also
included. And this you have by a palpable inference from these
scriptural passages. For if his kingdom is a kingdom of eternal peace
and eternal righteousness, it follows by inference from the antithesis
(a contrario) that sin, death, and the law will cease, and that those
who died in Christ, being buried and eaten by worms and turned to dust,
will rise again. This is clearly shown by these words, \"There shall be
no end of peace.\" Consequently, those who are children of this Eternal
Father will be heirs of the eternal kingdom 2c. Likewise: He wonderfully
justifies, guides, and counsels those who are challenged; He establishes
and fortifies them in the faith; consequently, however miserably they
are killed, mangled, burned, torn, they must rise again 2c. It is an
everlasting kingdom, it is a kingdom of freedom or a free kingdom,
without sin and without death; consequently the children of this kingdom
will also live, even if they have already died; if they are to live,
they must rise again.

Therefore it is proved by this clear conclusion that death, sin and the
law must be abolished, and that the rule in this kingdom must be a
freedom from sin, from death, from the law, from hell, from the power of
the devil 2c. Consequently, it cannot be a fleshly kingdom, as the
deluded Jews imagined.

These are the six names of the Messiah, which express his offices and
his works in the church, although they also include his person at the
same time. For this King could not administer these offices, which are
expressed in these six names, if he were not truly God and a divine
person, who is also truly man, the child born to us of the virgin. Thus,
the prophet includes in One Person the true GOD and man, the King of
honors, the eternal

peace, eternal life and righteousness; likewise the Savior, because he
broke the yoke of burden 2c. and the one who will raise the dead and
crown with eternal glory his own who died in faith.

**V. 7: That his dominion may be great, and that peace may be without
end.**

These are the works of the child that is born unto us, the eternal King.
His kingdom, which is a kingdom of freedom, will increase and become
great throughout the whole world in such a way that it will not remain
hidden in Judea alone, but will be propagated far and wide among all
generations and peoples to the ends of the earth. This was also foretold
in the second Psalm, v. 8: \"Cry unto me, and I will give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance, and the end of the world for thine own
possession\" 2c. So we also read Ps. 72:8, 10, 11: \"He shall reign from
sea to sea, and from the waters even to the end of the world. The kings
of the sea and of the isles will bring gifts, the kings of Sheba and of
Arabia will bring gifts. All kings will worship him, all nations will
serve him.\" The same testifies the promise that happened to Abraham
\[Gen. 22, 18.\]: \"By your seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed.\" Therefore, it will not only be an eternal kingdom, but also a
widely extended kingdom, and one that extends throughout the whole
world. That is, not only the Jews have a share in the glory of this
kingdom, but also all the Gentiles scattered throughout the world, who
recognize that this child has been born to them and that this Son has
been given to them. And herewith the preceding is confirmed, as if he
wanted to say: \"Many dead will rise and be gathered to eternal life
\[Joh. 5, 25.\], not only from the Jewish country, but from all ends of
the whole world. For this kingdom will be great among all the Gentiles
until the end of the world.

279\. here arises a question about the meme, which is found nowhere else
in the Bible but at the end of a word in closed form \[X\]; but the open
meme \[X\] is either in the middle or at the beginning of a word.

2188 . XXIII, 435-437. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 325-328.
219

Word. But here in the beginning of the word XXXXX is the closed, against
its kind and against the grammar. The Jews interpret it in this way:
Mine was therefore closed, because the increase and the liberty, to
which they should again reach after the Babylonian captivity, had been
hidden for the time, as long as the captivity lasted. But this is not
true, because Jeremiah clearly predicted that the captivity would last
seventy years.

Others explain it by the holy virgin, the mother of the child, and think
that it is hereby implied that this child should be born of a closed
mother, and of a pure, untouched, chaste virgin. And this is a godly
thought, which pleases me well. I do not reject it. And this opinion is
accepted by the godly Jews, 1) as well as by our people who know the
Hebrew language.

But how? if what Christ says in Luc. 8, 10, \"It is given unto you to
know the mystery of the kingdom of God,\" had also been indicated here,
that it means the terrible closure that the Jews have never understood
the miraculous government of this kingdom? As if he wanted to say: It
will be a miraculous increase, which will be closed to the Jews, which
they will not understand, because it is completely spiritual. For they
dream and think of a temporal kingdom, and the same would increase
temporally. Therefore, this enlargement and whole nature of Christ\'s
kingdom is closed to them. This frightening closure and blindness of the
Jews, methinks, was indicated by the closed my in the beginning of the
word. This kingdom will be in the world, and yet it is spiritual and
hidden. It will not be enlarged in a carnal way, but through the Word,
through baptism 2c. And the people of this king will be increased and
gathered to the kingdom of eternal life, eternal righteousness and
freedom, not to the kingdom of death, sin and law.

282\. it pleases me that the closed

1\) namely the believing Jews before Christ.

Mem. full of the secret, which is hidden from the Jewish synagogue, but
revealed to the Christian church, according to the saying \[Luc. 8,
10.\]: \"It is given to you to know\" 2c.: the foreign children, the
blind, rejected people, are furious in their mind. They expect a chochab
and a fleshly kingdom, and imagine such a kingdom. Through this
imagination and through this dream of a fleshly kingdom, they are
prevented from understanding the prophet. Thus the vision (visio) is
like a closed book to them, as Isaiah Cap. 29, 11. says: They are blind,
they do not see. The ceiling hangs before their hearts, 2 Cor. 3, 15.
that they do not understand what has been foretold so clearly, so
plainly. This, I believe, is indicated by the closed meme.

**There will be no end to peace.**

There will be a resurrection of the dead, an eternal kingdom without
sin, without death and law; we will be children, we will be heirs of God
and joint heirs with Christ in the glory of eternal bliss.

**On the throne of David and his kingdom, that he may judge** (or order)
**and strengthen** (or uphold) **it with judgment and righteousness from
henceforth even for ever.**

It will not be a kingdom of angels, but a kingdom among men, like those
who lived under David. Just as David was a king over the seed of
Abraham, and over the children of Israel, so this child will be a king
over mortal men, who are born of Israel, of David, and of those who are
their descendants. Therefore Abraham, David 2c. live with all their
descendants. Though they have decayed in their graves, yet in due time
they will rise again to eternal life and glory. This is what the prophet
says about the Israelites.

But where does that leave us Gentiles? I answer: Above \[v. 3.\] the
prophet has already said, \"Thou makest many of the Gentiles.\" And here
he says, \"His dominion will become great,\" and it will be spread all
over the face of the earth. Consequently, the Gentiles must become one
herd with the Jews, like

220 **D- xxiii, 437 f.** More extensive explanation of Isa. 9, 7. **W.**
vi, **328-332.** 221

one reads about it from time to time in Isaiah and in all the prophets.
\"Christ,\" as the apostle Rom. 15, 8. 9. says, \"was a minister of the
circumcision, for the truth of God, to confirm the promise made to the
fathers. But the Gentiles,\" he says, \"praise GOD nm mercy.\" Deün the
Gentiles have \[the blessing not through the promise, as the descendants
of the fathers, to whom the blessing is promised. For this cause Matthew
begins his Gospel thus: \"This is the book of the birth of JEsu Christ,
who is the son of David, the son of Abraham.\" To these the promise has
happened. Therefore, the prophet remains in the spelling of the promise,
saying, \"In the throne of David,\" 2c. Consequently, the children of
this king will be immortal and blessed.

But we are called Lemarbeh, that is, multiplication, and associated with
those.

According to the saying Gen. 22:18: \"Through your seed all the families
of the earth shall be blessed. Likewise Ps. 2, 8: \"Cry unto me, and I
will give thee the heathen for an inheritance, and the end of the world
for a possession.\" Again Ps. 72:8: \"He shall reign from sea to sea,
and from the waters even unto the end of the world,\" that is, over all
men. And so much may be said of the child that is born unto us, and of
the Son that is given unto us.

Now let us give thanks to God for this unspeakable mystery that is
revealed to us, and pray to this child and this Son that He, according
to His infinite goodness, may make us worthy to be and remain ours
according to these six names of His, Amen!

To God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit be praise and glory forever and
ever, Amen.

\[End of the more expansive explanation of the ninth chapter of
Isaiah.\]

**B.**

\(1\) Hitherto the prophet has spoken of individual punishments, namely,
insurrection, war, famine, concerning the word 2c.; now he sets forth
the last punishment in general: that the king of Assyria will carry them
all away with him. This is what we teach; our people will not be moved
by famine, war or pestilence, so the Turk or someone else will come and
turn everything around.

V. 1. 2. **Woe to those who make unjust laws.**

2 He puts the sin of the teachers in the first place. I think, however,
that especially those are indicated who are called Christian teachers in
the evangelists, as the judges and legal scholars are with us. The
prophet, however, has used more emphatic words, since he calls the laws
\"unjust laws\" (leges iniquitatis), or laws that only cause misery and
trouble. But this is the proper name of human justice. For all life and
law, and

All works that are not in the spirit of God make the conscience weary
and torture the body without any benefit. For this reason, human
statutes are rightly called laborious and burdensome laws. For, first,
they exhaust the consciences; second, they afflict the body, for they
are not kept without great difficulty; third, they consume even
possessions. Therefore, the hypocrites are far more sour in their human
statutes than the godly are in the true service of God.

V. 3. 4. **What will you do on the day of visitation?**

3 This is when the king of Assyria will devastate you. So he attaches
the punishment to the sin.

**Where will you leave your honor?**

He calls the kingdom, the priesthood, holiness, in sum, everything they
relied on, \"honor.

222 L. XXII, IIV-I12. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 332-335.
223

**V. 5. 6. O woe to Assur.**

\(5\) This is a description of the king of Assyria, who was to destroy
Israel and Judah. But this word seems to have been spoken when the
people were led away from their land by King Salmanasser, who led away
ten tribes in about the first years of Hezekiah\'s reign.

**Your hand.**

6\. namely the Assyrian.

**V. 7 Although he does not mean it.**

Now he comforts the godly; but when the rut also intends to rage against
them, it does so to its own destruction and is destroyed.

**V. 8. 9. Are not my princes all kings?**

He boasts of his powers against Judah and lists six famous victories
that he has achieved, through which he hopes that he will also conquer
Jerusalem. Furthermore, this boasting of the enemies troubles the
sorrowful souls very much, and one must pay special attention to this
affectus at this point. For he wanted to introduce the arrogant and
powerful victor in a personal poem, so that he would comfort the godly:
for although the enemies were powerful and certain of victory, they
would still fail. For Salmanasser had already led away ten tribes to
Assyria 1) and Judah alone was left, abandoned from all protection and
help. Sanherib promised himself a certain victory over this one as well.
Therefore he sings the song of triumph before the victory. Judah,
however, realizing that it is no match for the enemy, cries out in
despair: \"I am lost! Here this word is held out to the despairing
people, promising that the threats of the king of Assyria are in vain;
the godly will be preserved, and the victory will remain on Judah\'s
side. But this was hard to believe, since they learned the opposite; and
yet the godly believed it, and there was a happy outcome.

1\) In the Latin editions: in Ladvtoniurn.

9 Thus, in spiritual trials, the forces of sin and death seem
insurmountable. But the Word raises up the despondent soul and comforts
it because it promises life. \"He that believeth on me,\" saith Christ,
\"shall not die. \"2c. \[John 11:26.\] When this word is grasped in
faith, it saves the conscience, however much it trembles, from despair,
and brings with it cheerful victory over all dangers. In this way such
passages of Scripture must be applied to comfort. For although the
things in which one is challenged are 2) many and varied, and the
enemies are different, yet the movements are the same, and the same
Spirit works in the godly. Therefore, we must learn not to look at the
power of the enemy, nor at our weakness, but to look at the Word without
fail. For this will make the heart firm, so that it will not despair,
but wait for the help of God. For God wants to overcome our enemies,
both spiritual and physical, not through power and force, but through
weakness, as the text says: \"My power is mighty in the weak\" \[2 Cor.
12:9\].

10\. \"Calne\" 3) is mentioned Gen. 10, 10. \"Carchemis\", I believe,
was located behind Babylon \[2 Chron. 35, 20.\]. \"Hamath\" is Antioch.

**V. 10. 11. As my hand has found.**

Thus he boasts against Judah with six glorious victories. Not only does
he claim that his forces are stronger, but also that his gods are more
powerful, so that he can deprive them of their trust in God and their
spiritual protection and help. But he described the arrogance of the
enemies of godliness very well, who frighten the godly in a twofold way,
first, by boasting about their powers, second, by depriving them of
spiritual protection and help, and of trust in God. And this is the
nature of all who are hostile to godliness, whether they be tyrants or
heretics; for both boast of religion, and are powerful before the world.
If, then, we are deprived of our trust in God

2\) Erlanger: tentationem instead of: tsntationnrn.

3\) \"Calne\" is found in Gen. 10, 10., also Amos 6, 2. (\"Calne\"),
while here, Isa. 10, 9., \"Calno\" is found.

**224 L.** xxn, 112-N5. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 10, 10. 11.
W. v i, Liö-ns. **225**

we are lost; but if we keep the same, Satan is defeated.

12 But this is written for our comfort, that we may know that we are not
alone, nor the first to suffer this. For the same affliction of the
godly remaineth in the world; even as the same enemy remaineth to the
godly. But it is a great comfort to know that others also suffer the
same. Otherwise, the godly would take such afflictions as a sign of
God\'s wrath, when they do not know that the church suffers in such a
way.

\(13\) Furthermore, it should be noted here that God is called in
Scripture a God whom one serves. For God was not merely revealed to us
(nudus), but clothed with a service, and this service He Himself
prescribed for us. Thus, in the New Testament, baptism and the Lord\'s
Supper are, as it were, God\'s clothes, in which God shows Himself to us
and acts with us. In the Old Testament he was clothed with the Ark of
the Covenant, with the promises, with circumcision and the sacrifices
2c. For God can never be known in any other way than by such outward
things and services which He Himself has commanded us to serve Him by.

Furthermore, there is a wondrous confusion of religions and worship in
the world. This has come about because, since everyone wanted to have
and honor one God, they have done so without God\'s word, according to
the opinion of their own hearts. But this is actually idolatry, when we
give God Himself a form and clothe Him with a worship service that He
Himself has not instituted and that He has not commanded in His Word.
For God does not want us to serve Him in any other way than He Himself
has commanded. Therefore, those who seek another way to honor God depart
from the true God and worship the idol of their heart. Thus, a monk of
worship boasts that he worships the true GOtt; but he does not serve the
true GOtt. The reason is that he clothes God with another sign that he
has invented for himself, and does not serve God with the service with
which he wants to be worshipped. For God has nowhere commanded that he
be served in such clothing, with such plates, with such apparel.

The monk who observes his rule is an idolater, but he who has and
worships the true God, that is, God\'s lawful service. Therefore, a monk
who observes his religious rule in the holiest way is an idolater; but
he who has and worships the true God, who has the rightful service of
God, that is, the service of God instituted by the Word and by signs of
God. In this word and in these signs God clothes himself, as it were, so
that he can be understood by us (since he is otherwise
incomprehensible).

For no one will comprehend the mere God; and this is the case of
Lucifer, if one wants to comprehend God in the spirit without the
clothing with which he clothed himself, namely with the flesh of Christ;
likewise with the outward signs of baptism and the Lord\'s Supper; as is
now done by the enthusiasts, who deprive God of the word and the signs
by which he revealed himself to us, 2c. and deal with the mere God. But
we are to be reminded that we do not deal with the mere God or with God
in and for Himself (absoluto), but we are to take hold of those forms
which He Himself has presented to us, in which He has certainly promised
to be found, namely in the man Christ and in the sacraments; just as He
was certainly found with the Jews in the temple, in which He had
commanded Him to serve.

\(16\) In this way Salmanasser speaks of the service of God, or of God
being served, and mocks the Jews, as if to say: Behold, God has been
worshipped in these places with greater splendor than among you, and yet
they could not be saved from their gods, much less will you be saved 2c.
Furthermore, this is the strongest armor with which Satan assaults the
hearts of the godly, so that they should believe that Christ cannot and
will not preserve us. For if the worship of so many monks, so many works
of men, which are good in appearance, are in vain, so will your idle,
weak and futile faith be in vain.

\(17\) During such attacks and fiery darts of Satan, the soul is in very
grave danger, and a very firm faith is required.

226 xxn, H5-1I7. Interpretations on the Prophets, W. vi, 338-341. 227

He who can stand up against the devilish thoughts and say: Although
Christ should leave the whole papacy, yes, the whole world, he will not
leave me. For even though I have many and great sins, Christ\'s
suffering is greater; for this I have Christ\'s word and sign that this
suffering is taken over for my sins, and that God has done enough 2c.
This judgment of the spirit of the true God overcomes the devil and puts
him to flight. And in such battles one finally sees how great a comfort
it is to have God not merely (nudum) in the spirit, but who has become
flesh and is clothed with baptism and the Lord\'s Supper. By these signs
he testifies that his death has been sufficient for our sins, so that we
may have forgiveness of sins, eternal righteousness and eternal life in
the name of Christ through faith, amen.

V. 12: **But when the Lord has finished all his works.**

018 He speaketh of the work of judgment, that he chastened his children
in judgment, and not in wrath. For I understand the following words of
Sanherib, who was smitten, but the preceding ones of Salmanahser. For
though they were different kings, yet they were in the same people.

V. 13. 14. **I have established it by the power of my hands.**

19 He describes the arrogance of Sanherib. ^z^) As if to say: All that I
have done, I have done by my power and wisdom. What will the good
Hezekiah, the poor sinner, do against such an opponent who is mighty and
wise? But as the help of God is closest when the godly are closest to
despair, so also the downfall of the godless is closest when they are
most secure and at the highest level of arrogance, because of certain
success. The reason is that God does not suffer arrogance.

z\) From here to the end of the paragraph, the 1532 edition has only the
following: But there is also comfort in this, that God resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble.

can. God bestows gifts without measure, but if we walk along hopefully,
\"and make haste ego \[I\] and a feci \[I did it\] out of it, it\'s
already over,\" because God does not want to nor cannot stand it.
Therefore, God would gladly make us rich, and give each one a whole
kingdom; but because we immediately, after we have become rich, add this
detestable little word Feci \[I have done it\], therefore He is
compelled to chastise us with poverty, disgrace, persecutions, sword
2c., \"and yet can hardly take the ego and the Feci from us with all
necessity\".

\[Instead of what is commanded in the Vulgate: Quoniam si elevetur
virga\] translate this passage thus:

V. 15. 16. **May an axe boast against him who cuts with it, or a saw
defy him who cuts with it, as he who guides the stick can boast, and
lifts and guides it as easily as if it were not wood.**

20 Therefore the opinion is this: The king of Assyria is my saw and my
axe, which I use to chastise my people. Therefore he acts foolishly in
boasting of his powers and of his fortune, as if this were done by his
counsel and not by mine. For I raise such a monarch with less effort
than if someone lifts up a straw 2c.

21 But this passage also serves to comfort us, so that we know that God
guides the hearts of kings and princes, like a saw or a rod, who can do
nothing by their own power if God does not allow it. Therefore, when
they are angry with us and threaten us, let us pray, and wait for our
ministry, as we do, with writing, reading, comforting, etc., in the hope
that God will have all their plots, even their hands, in His hand. If it
pleases him to humiliate us through them, let us say, \"Blessed be I, O
Lord, that thou hast humbled me;\" but if it pleases him not, all that
they undertake will be in vain.

22 Furthermore, this parable teaches us that we can do absolutely
nothing, neither truly good nor evil; 1) against those who claim free
will. For the saw does not make itself, and the work is not done.

1\) A distinguishing mark is missing here in the Erlanger.

**228** \^n\> N7-I20. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 10, 15-22. W.
VI, 341-344. **229**

of the saw is not the work of the saw, but the work of the one who pulls
it. When he stops pulling it, it rusts. Thus we are God\'s works, which
God sets in motion. And the objection they make that the saw is an
inanimate thing is not valid, therefore this is a clumsy simile. For God
compares the most powerful monarch, with all his power and wisdom, to a
saw. He is certainly a living tool, and yet he is compared to a dead
tool. And one should make no distinction among the creatures against the
Creator. For when one looks at the Creator, human wisdom and power are
no more than a stick or a straw. But there is a difference of creatures
among themselves; there one surpasses the other 2c. The pope has also
used this passage in the chapter Solide, where he makes the emperor a
saw, but himself the one who pulls it. There, this manifest beast calls
itself a god.

**V. 17-19. And the light of Israel.**

That is, God in His temple at Jerusalem. For thus did God destroy
Sanherib in One Night by the angel. Thus our God, who is our God in
worship, is our light and happiness, our salvation and comfort. But he
will be a fire against our enemies.

**And will consume its thorns.**

024 Thus he scornfully calleth Sanherib. As if to say: Because of the
multitude of your people, you think you are a forest, yes, Mount Carmel,
and a well-cultivated field. But thou deceivest thyself; thou art as it
were a thorn, which I will burn with light trouble 2c. This is the end
of the wicked. God is very weak among us, and for a time allows Himself
to be mocked and oppressed, but at last He comes and becomes a consuming
fire to His enemies. This will also be experienced by those who cause us
so much trouble today.

**V. 20. 21. At that time the remnant of Israel will no longer abandon
themselves 2c.**

25\. not only will Sanherib be defeated, but the people will be defeated
as well, after they have been so

1\) Erlanger: omnixotentia instead of: omni potontia.

will be chastened, will mend their ways and become righteous. \"They
will no longer rely on the one who smites them,\" that is, they will no
longer make covenants, as Ahaz did, but they will put their trust in
their God. But notice here the description of human trust, that relying
on men is really nothing other than relying on the one who smites us.
For we see this in all the histories of all peoples/ and in the daily
examples of our times. Thus the Frenchman, after he had entered into an
alliance with Pope Julius, covered Julius with war and beat him. Thus
Pompey was overcome by Caesar, from whose kinship he expected protection
and help. Therefore, let us place our hope in God, who does not lie nor
deceive. People can do nothing but lie and deceive. Therefore, it
happens that one is beaten by the one on whom he relies, as the Holy
Spirit says here.

**V. 22. for when corruption is controlled 2c. (consummatio abbreviata
etc.).**

\(26\) This is a general saying; that is, God always punishes in such a
way that He nevertheless leaves remnants among His people.
\"Destruction\" is that he executes his chastisement and punishes, that
he needs the scourge. But in this destruction he \"steers\", that is, he
does not destroy the whole people, but then, when it seems to be badly
done for us, he stands by, helps and straightens up again. Thus, in
disgrace, in death, and, to put it briefly, in all dangers, when ruin
seems to be there, steering comes. Thus it is said in Job \[Cap. 11, 17,
Vulg.\]: When you think you are lost, you will be like the morning star.

27 Paul keeps this saying in the epistle to the Romans, only that he
made the general one special \[Rom. 9, 27, 28\]. But he takes great
pains to show that the tax had already been paid and the promises had
been kept to the rest of Israel.

28 Furthermore, the Holy Spirit speaks according to the sense of the
weak, because he calls the punishment a destruction. For so it seems

230 L. xxn, 120-122. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 344-34S.
231

In the time of temptation, it is as if it were a perpetual ruin, and one
cannot see an end to the chastisement, but the souls think that they are
utterly damned and lost. In this despair, which is truly ruin, the Holy
Spirit moves the heart through the Word, thus creating a tax.

029 Now this was a very hard trial, because the remnant saw that all the
people were rejected and perishing. Here, with difficulty and
difficulty, they were able to believe in a tax; just as we also, each
one for himself, when destruction is before our eyes, can hardly be
raised to believe that a tax will happen; that although all our works
are defiled and unrighteous, yet God will preserve us, for the sake of
an alien righteousness, which is in Christ, but which becomes ours
through faith 2c. Therefore one must turn away his eyes from the \"sand
by the sea\" \[Rom. 9, 27.\], and believe that the rest will be saved by
grace.

\(30\) The fact that he adds, \"Then righteousness comes abundantly,\"
is nothing other than that the rest will be saved.

31\. Paul followed the seventy interpreters, and gave it \[Rom. 9,
28.\]: verbum consummans \[ζό\^ον συντεΛών, when he will lead out the
word\^, and transferred it to the word of the gospel, which struck this
people and converted some few. But this Hebrew phrase might be better
translated res consummans \[when he will put an end to these things\].
Some attribute the destruction that is being controlled not to the
punishment but to the people, that God would cut the people short,
choose some few, reject the rest, and that through these few
righteousness would come abundantly, that is, that the apostles, the
remnant of Israel, would spread the word of the gospel. This opinion is
also good, but I prefer to follow the former.

V. 23 **For the LORD of hosts will cause destruction to come.**

This is as it were a proverb, as if he wanted to say: God always does
this, that he also provides remedy for the punishment. He always helps
in trouble, he straightens up, he protects 2c.

V. 24. **As happened in Egypt.**

033 After Sanherib had conquered a part of Judea, he went out to meet
the king of Egypt and struck him; then he came again before Jerusalem
and besieged it, but when he returned he laid Judea waste. But he calls
it \"a staff,\" that is, a rod, which he used in his return by the Red
Sea, after he had smitten the king of Egypt.

V. 25. 26. **As in the battle of Midian.**

34 He hereby implies that the army of Sanherib was not to be defeated by
human forces or weapons, but by God. This was a great faith that could
have believed this.

V. 27. **For the yoke will rot before the fat.**

35\. jugum a facie olei is a Hebrew expression, that is, \"before the
fat\".

V. 28-32. **He comes to Ajath.**

36 All this is to be taken in imitation (mimitice). For he relates the
various rumors of Sanherib\'s arrival before Jerusalem. Yesterday he
stood here, today he will be in that place 2c. By such rumors the
inhabitants of Jerusalem have been put into the greater fear; as it is
wont to happen.

V. 33. 34. **But behold, the LORD of hosts.**

Here he strengthens his people against the rumors of the approach of
Sanherib. But these are figurative sayings with which he indicates that
the army of the enemies should be killed by an angel.

**232** L. XXII, 122-124. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. II, I. 2.
W. VI, 349-3S1. **233**

**The eleventh chapter.**

In the previous chapter he describes the fall of the king of Assyria and
the redemption of Judah. Now he begins a new chapter, and adds to the
bodily promise a prophecy of the future kingdom of Christ, what it will
be like, what kind of kingdom it will be, what kind of king it will be,
and what kind of subjects it will be. 2c.

**V. 1. And there shall arise a rod from the tribe of Jesse.**

\(2\) This is an excellent passage of the kingdom of Christ, which he
calls a choice branch, that it may show us the beginning of the
spiritual kingdom that is to come. For there it is not as in worldly
kingdoms; there first a people is brought together; but this king will
be born before he has a people, and it will be a single branch, which
will come up from a root or from a withered and dead trunk. This root is
the tribe of Jesse, that is, David himself, in whom he summarizes all
the promises. When this root will have lost all hope, then Christ will
arise from it.

3 This is a hidden description of the time when Christ had to be born,
namely when this tribe or root had lost all hope, namely after they had
already lost the kingdom. As it is said in Gen. 49, 10: \"The scepter of
Judah shall not be taken away, nor a champion from his feet, until the
coming of the hero, to whom the nations shall cleave.\" At that time,
however, the tribe had lost all hope, since Herod was king and the
Romans had usurped the priesthood and sold it to whomever they pleased.
Thus both the kingdom and the priesthood were lost at the time Christ
was born, and the Hans of David and the kingdom were indeed a dead
tribe.

4\. further, this is a brief epitome of the whole theology and divine
works, that

Christ did not come until the tribe died and was completely without
hope; that therefore, when all hope is gone, it is the time of
salvation, and one should believe that God is closest when He seems to
be farthest away. ^a^) Thus, at this time of ours, during the supreme
tyranny of the Pabst, he gave the light of the Gospel. Some interpret
the root from the Virgin Mary. This is a very godly opinion, but it
seems to be more appropriate to draw it to the whole tribe of Judah.

**V. 2. On whom the Spirit of the Lord will rest.**

Now he describes the powers, the weapons and the whole royal equipment
with which the kingdom will be established. This kingdom will not be
established by weapons and horses. For it is only a branch. Therefore,
it will be a gentle kingdom, mighty through goodness and fruits, not
through weapons or power.

**The Spirit of the Lord.**

6 These are the weapons. It will be a spiritual kingdom; he will
administer it through the Holy Spirit alone, and work all things. But he
adds who the spirit will be and how it will be constituted. It is \"the
Spirit of Wisdom\" who teaches the knowledge of God and all godliness;
for this is our

a\) From § 2 to here the following is found in the edition of 1532: Here
the prophet has inserted a hidden description of the time
(chronographiam). For he says that Christ will be born from the tribe of
Jesse, that is, when there can be no hope for this tribe or root,
because the kingdom was already lost, as it is said in Genesis 49:10.
But there was no hope for the tribe at the time when Herod was king and
the Romans also sold the priesthood at that time. So at the time Christ
was born, both the kingdom and the priesthood were lost, and indeed the
house of David and the kingdom was a dead tribe. Furthermore, this tends
to be the order of God\'s works, that the time of help is at the time of
despair, and then one must believe God to be closest when He seems to be
farthest.

234 **u. xxu, 124-126.** Interpretations on the prophets. **W.** vi,
**351-354.** 235

Wisdom. But \"understanding\" is the judgment that arises from this
wisdom, that we may perceive what contends with godliness, and that we
may judge from false doctrines, from Satan\'s persecutions 2c.

**The Spirit of the Council.**

\(7\) Now this belongs to the cross and to the time of trouble, that he
should counsel, comfort, and direct the afflicted.

**The spirit of strength.**

8\. who gives victory and carries out these counsels, so that the
consolation remains firmly in the heart. Thus, when I see a brother
thrown into bonds, covered with shame, deprived of his goods for
Christ\'s sake, I comfort him with the words, so that he may bear the
cross patiently: \"The servant is not greater than his lord. Did they
call the father of the house Beelzebub?\" 2c. \[Likewise: \"Blessed are
they that mourn\" \[Matth. 5, 4. 1. \"Whom the Lord loveth he
chasteneth\" \[Hebr. 12, 6.\]. When he takes hold of these words with
his heart, the Spirit powerfully works the strength to triumph.

\(9\) But we must remember that just as one owes this service to
another, that he may comfort in tribulation; so he who is in temptation
owes this again, that he may hear the comfort as a certain word of God
(as it is). For since Satan tries to flood the hearts with his thoughts,
as it were with a flood of sin, one must therefore hear the word, which
awakens completely different thoughts than the thoughts of Satan.

**The Spirit of Knowledge.**

\(10\) The spirit of knowledge belongs to the common use of life among
the brethren, that each one may be guided by the customs of those with
whom he associates, and thus avoid all vexations. But he connects
knowledge with fear (the Latin translator has given it: the spirit of
godliness, but it must be translated: \"of fear\"), because knowledge in
and of itself puffs up \[1 Cor. 8, 1.\]. And this is the description of
the kingdom of Christ, in which way the branch of this kingdom\...

be propagated. The spirit of wisdom and understanding belongs to the
holding of the word of faith; the spirit of counsel and fortitude to the
cross; the spirit of knowledge and fear to the intercourse with the
brethren.

**V. 3. and his smelling will be in the fear of the LORD.**

In judging, Christ will not follow appearances or works, but as it says
in the Psalm: \"He is pleased with those who fear Him\" \[Ps. 147:11\].
But this is very necessary to know. For there is nothing more dangerous,
and which deceives more easily, even holy men, than the appearance of
works and hypocrisy. The world cannot overcome these; only the spirit,
of which he speaks here, can. Therefore it has happened that at all
times so many doctrines of works, of sects, of false spirituality
(religionum), orders and ways of life have arisen, by which the world
has become so captivated that it has allowed itself to be completely
taken in by the larva of works.

\(12\) Therefore we are to learn from this passage that righteousness
does not depend on our works, but just as we all died through a foreign
sin, so we must also all be saved through a foreign righteousness. For
in this kingdom we are not judged according to what the eyes see, nor
according to what the ears hear, that is, according to each one\'s own
works, but according to the righteousness of Christ, which believers
take hold of in faith, rely on, and are saved. The others follow certain
works; therefore, since they have chosen something that is not in common
and ordinary life, it cannot be otherwise than that they are arrogant
and presumptuous. Thus the hermits, because they led a hard way of life,
wanted to be something higher in the church than the bishops, as if they
had been transferred to another world. But the Spirit does not turn to
this larva 2c. \"He judges with justice\"; as follows.

**V. 4. But he will judge the poor with righteousness.**

13\. just as he says in the Gospel \[Matt. 5:6\], \"Those who hunger and
thirst for righteousness shall be filled.\" Thus he describes

236 xxii, **126-129.** Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 11, 4-9.
**W. vi, W4-3S8.** 237

the kingdom of Christ to have such a doctrine that teaches a foreign
righteousness. This righteousness is given from heaven to those who do
not have righteousness, to the poor and miserable, who are troubled by
their sins and evil conscience, and need forgiveness of sins.

**And shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth.**

14\. This is a confirmation of the foregoing, that^b^ ) this kingdom is
not maintained by weapons, but by the power of the Holy Spirit. \"The
rod of the mouth\" means the oral word or gospel which proceeds from the
mouth of all those who teach purely. This is not ineffective, but
fruitful; it justifies the godly, it judges and condemns the ungodly.

**V. 5. Righteousness will be the girdle of his loins.**

15.^c^ ) Our Christ and His kingdom are also equipped with weapons, not
with sword and iron, but with righteousness and faith, as the weapons of
Christ and the church are listed in the epistle to the Ephesians \[Cap.
6, 11. ff\]. Now that we believe, that we pray, that we teach, these are
our weapons with which we overcome all temptations, whether spiritual or
bodily. For the faith with which we cling to the righteousness of Christ
is all-powerful and victorious against all danger. For the kingdom of
Christ exists and is sustained by these two things, faith and the word,
or by preaching and believing. Now follow the fruits of the word.

**V. 6. The wolves will dwell with the lambs.**

b\) In the 1532 edition, the first words of tz 14 bis are missing:
\"This kingdom will not\" 2c.

c\) In the 1532 edition, §15 reads thus: The weapons of our Christ are
not swords, but righteousness and faith. For because we cling to his
righteousness, we easily overcome conscience and sins. And we also
contend in faith; for prayer is a work of faith, by which all terrors
and evils are overcome, according to your saying John 16:23:
\"Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that shall my Father give you\"
2c.

16 He also lists the fruits of the word. These are images by which he
indicates that the tyrants, the works saints and the mighty in the world
will be converted and received into the church. But who does these great
miracles? Who brings about these miraculous changes? The word, namely
the oral word, which comes from the mouth of a sinful man.

**V. 7. 8. And an infant will have his delight.**

This indicates the boldness of the little children. Although this is
also fulfilled in the letter, as we read in the stories that the holy
fathers tore the snakes, I will rather follow the secret interpretation
that the opinion is this: A child will take pleasure in pulling the
vipers out of their hole, that is, the preachers of the Word, who are
despised, weak and simple-minded people in the world, will cast out the
devil that dwells in the hearts of men. They will not be afraid of the
basilisks, that is, the heretics, who poison the listeners even by their
mere sight. They will kill them with joy, that is, they will deprive
people of those poisonous and harmful opinions they have in their
hearts. And they will do all this through the verbally preached word of
the Gospel. Therefore, it is the highest ungodliness, and a more than
diabolical error, that today many, even among those who consider
themselves somewhat learned, despise the outward preaching of the Word
as ineffective.

**V. 9: One will never die.**

18\. there will be perfect peace in the church; there will be such unity
that will unite even those who disagree.

**For the land is full of the knowledge of the Lord.**

This is the cause of this most beautiful harmony, that they will have an
abundance of the knowledge of Christ. For when my righteousness and your
righteousness are set aside, that is, when neither my righteousness nor
your righteousness is valid, but only the righteousness of Christ, then
peace will inevitably follow, because we are all at peace.

238 L. xxn, 12S-I3I. Interpretations about the prophets. W. vi, 3Z8-ni.
239

are equally sinners and in need of grace. Thus, in Christ all things are
one, and no one has cause to prefer himself to the other.

V. 10. **And it will come to pass in that day.**

20 This is an excellent passage about the calling of the Gentiles and
the spreading of the Word among the Gentiles. And it is mainly from this
text that the conclusion is drawn: If the Gentiles are to be united with
the Jews in one body, then the whole Jewish ceremonial law will
necessarily have to be abolished. Thus he nullifies all trust in the
Mosaic righteousness and all merits of works. And this passage must be
diligently noted, so that when the calling of the Gentiles is mentioned,
wherever it may be, this conclusion is immediately added: \"Thus it
necessarily follows that the law, and the whole service of the law, must
be done away with. But if the law must necessarily be done away with, it
follows that no good works serve for righteousness, but righteousness
will be by grace and apart from us. Thus also the abolition of the law
is indicated in the 117th Psalm, v. 1: \"Praise the Lord, all ye
Gentiles.\" And not only this, but also the righteousness by grace is
indicated, which comes to us without previous works. For the Gentiles
are a people without the law of God, stained with all kinds of sins.

21 Likewise, when he adds that the Gentiles will ask about this root, it
follows that they will not seek Moses further. Likewise, that neither
the Law, nor Moses, nor the Levites, nor the prophets were sufficient
for righteousness. Thus, in the word \"they will ask\" lies the power
and use of the kingdom of Christ, which will draw all things to itself
after He is exalted \[John 12:32\]. They will ask for the root;
consequently both Jews and Gentiles will reject all that is theirs;
consequently^d^ ) no other righteousness applies but the righteousness
of Christ; consequently all works, merits, and what not Christ

d\) From here to the end of § 21, the 1532 edition has: are nothing,
works, merit, and everything that is not Christ, that is, it is
condemned and altogether useless for righteousness.

is damned if it is done in the opinion of being justified by it.

22\) \"To ask\" means to believe, to care, to be anxious to keep Christ
and His righteousness. Therefore, this passage of the prophet absolutely
destroys the kingdom of the Jews, yes, also of the Gentiles. For if they
ask about Christ, it follows that they will abandon their idols, which
they have worshipped. And in this way this text overthrows and reverses
all kingdoms until the end of the world; as we also see that the kingdom
of the pope falls, which is a wild heap (chaos) of the most diverse
religions and objects of confidence. Therefore, this root must
necessarily cause confusion among all the kingdoms in the world. Now he
adds a description of the person.

**It stands as a banner for the nations.**

\(23\) One cannot inquire after Christ by one\'s own doing, but the
exaltation of the \"image\" moves the Gentiles to inquire after him. The
panier is lifted up by the preaching of the gospel; for Christ is
presented to the eyes of the mind by the word, that they may look for
him. But he calls it a war-dress, because Christ has to do and is strong
in the temptations. Likewise, because Christians are always in battle
and strife against Satan, the world, and their flesh.

**His rest will be honor.**

24\. for so I will rather translate it, than his grave \[sepulcrum in
the Vulgate\]. Here he adds how he will set up his kingdom. But he calls
\"his rest\" his death, because after his death Christ will begin his
kingdom, and will be full of glory, when he will be considered dead by
all.

Furthermore, in these passages dealing with the kingdom of Christ, it
must be noted that the divinity and humanity of Christ are described
therein. He calls Christ \"the root of Jesse\", therefore he will be a
natural son of Jesse, and an essential and true man, who has body and
soul. That the Gentiles will ask about him is because of his divinity.
For such a faith comes to no one but

**240** L. xxn, 131-133. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. I I,
10-16. W. vi, 361-364. **241**

God alone; as has been said above in the eighth chapter \[§ § ff\]. And
to redeem, to liberate, to help are divine works, which cannot be
attributed to anyone but the true and essential God. Thus it is also
said that he will be the son of a virgin. For if he is to redeem the
Gentiles, it is necessary that he be without sin; consequently he will
not be born in the flesh of sin; consequently he will be born of a
virgin without a fleshly father. Furthermore, he speaks quite clearly of
the suffering and death of Christ, since he says that he will rest in
the grave. His resurrection is also remembered by saying: \"His rest
will be glory\", that is, after his death he will reign gloriously.

V.11. **And the Lord will stretch out his hand at that time.**

26 He could not say anything else about the kingdom of Christ; therefore
he now adds images, and what he had said before in a simple way, he now
expresses by figurative speeches, as this is the custom of this prophet.
As if he wanted to say: This will then only be the true execution from
the land of Egypt, when both Jews and Gentiles will thus be gathered
into One Church. \"Pathros\", I believe, are the Cyrenians or the
neighbors of the Cyrenians. The \"Elamites\" are the Persians.
\"Sinear\" is where Babylon stood. \"Hamath\" is Antioch. The islands of
the sea are towards the evening in the Mediterranean Sea.

V. 12. **and will raise a banner among the Gentiles.**

27 Not at Jerusalem; consequently, the return will not be bodily.

V. 13. 14. **But they will be on the neck of the Philistines.**

28 This is all figurative, indicating the miraculous progress of the
word, as if to say, Then shall be glorious victories; all things shall
yield unto the gospel. Ammon, Moab, Edom, Kedar are parts of the stony
Arabia. In the Arabic language, however, it has been named with the
general word Kedar. He thus indicates that the apostles will lay hands
on these nations and that they will be obedient to the gospel.

V. 15. 16. **And the Lord will banish the river of the sea (linguam
maris).**

29 Linguam maris. This is how the Hebrews describe the mouths of rivers,
and likewise the gulfs of the sea. Here, however, he points to the Nile
River, so that Egypt will also believe in the gospel.

**And will let his hand go over the water (super flumen).**

30\. when lumen \[the stream\] is put par excellence, it means the
Euphrates.

**\[That one may walk through it with shoes on\].**

\(31\) For the river to be dried up means that it will give way to the
gospel, so that it can be preached freely and unhindered.

**The twelfth chapter.**

Now he adds a song in which he describes how the preaching of the new
testament is. But it is, as it were, a concealed opposition to the
worship of the Old Testament. As if he wanted to say: In the Old
Testament there were many kinds of worship; in the New, instead of all
of them, there will be this one kind of worship, namely the sacrifice of
praise that

Boasting and giving thanks. In the Old Testament all kinds of cattle
were slaughtered; in the New Testament the pursuit of wisdom, 1) works
and our merits are as it were strangled, the old man is killed. For he
who praises God from his heart and gives thanks to Him confesses that

1\) Jenaer and Erlanger: sapientins, studin.

242 L. xxii, 133-136. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 364-367.
243

he received everything from God, that he was condemned and unskilled in
all good works 2c.

**V. 1. that you were angry with me.**

2 He thanks God that he has removed his wrath. But the wrath is not only
the killing, but that wrath which the law works, the terror of death and
the sting of death.

V. 2. **Behold, God is my salvation.**

3\. this is a description of peace in the heart. ^e^) As if he wanted to
say: Then one will preach like this: \"Behold, GOtt is my salvation.\" I
now have what to lean on; I no longer have an angry GOD, but a GOD of
salvation. Although we are now in great danger, and are constantly under
the arrows of Satan, yet Christ sustains us, so that he does not wound
us or kill us. That is why he is called a God of salvation and not of
destruction, because he does not come to destroy, but to make the
faithful blessed. On the other hand, the unbelievers do not have God as
their God of salvation, but they are defeated and subject to all
dangers.

**I am safe, and I am not afraid.**

4 If there is still some fear left in us, it is either a temptation of
Satan or a remnant of the old man. For in Christ there can be nothing
but the highest security and joy; as it is said in Rom. 5:1: \"Now that
we have been justified, we have peace with God.

**For God the Lord is my strength.**

These words are repeated from the 15th chapter of the second book of
Moses. As if to say: Then they will sing, just as Moses sang after
Pharaoh was drowned, since he did not praise any of his works or deeds,
but simply thanked God for the redemption.

e\) In the edition of 1532 follows here in § 3 only: Those who believe
have the God of salvation; but the unbelievers find cast down and
subjected to all the persecutions of Satan.

**And my psalm.**

This is the subject of my psalm: by praising, singing and glorifying
him, we overcome. That is why he talks about salvation right after that.

**And is my salvation.**

7\. ^f^) Isaiah did not copy this whole verse from Moses without special
consideration, in which this last part in particular is to be noted,
that the Christians overcome in no other way than by the word, but by
boasting and singing this psalm, so that one may know that in the
victory nothing at all depends on our powers, on our works, on our
righteousness and merit, but only on the preaching of the oral and
outward word, which neither Satan nor his members, the godless men, can
suffer. Whether thou be afflicted with sadness, or with
faintheartedness, or with any other evil, if thou canst break through
but so far as to hear the word, thou hast overcome, even as Gideon alone
by the sound of the trumpets smote the Midianites \[Judges 7:22\].
Therefore, it is rightly considered that the enthusiasts must be
possessed by Satan, who despise the outward word as if it were invalid,
and falsify it. And Satan intends through them exactly what he intended
before through the pope. For at that time the holy scripture was covered
with empty dreams; but now that it has been torn out of that darkness,
he despises it through these vain spirits, and persuades that it should
not be respected.

It is therefore no wonder that in the great light of the Word that God
has revealed to us at this time, all the hatred of the world is kindled
against us, and Satan looks and rages against us through his members
more than ever before. For he feels the

f\) Instead of § 7-10, the 1532 edition has the following: Further,
because he remembereth salvation, so also is Las cross and the pursuits
of Satan and the world signified, from which we shall be safe, if we
have the word in our hearts. For by the word we must overcome, by
thoughts we will never win. Yes, it is the most harmful thing to indulge
in thoughts and dispute with Satan at the time of temptation.

244 k- XXII, 136-138. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 12, 2-6. W.
VI, 367-371. 245

Power of the word; and because he knows that we are exceedingly weak for
the sake of our flesh, yet it grieves him that we retain the
insurmountable weapons, namely the word, with which all his power is
beaten to the ground. That he therefore hates the word does not come
from a defect in the word, but from the infinite wickedness of this
spirit, just as a man of impulse, because his eyes are to blame, cannot
stand the sun, which in itself is good and lovely to all.

\(9\) But we should always remember this verse, that there is no other
way to overcome Satan and all evil than the word, especially in
spiritual temptations. If a man abandons the word in these temptations,
and struggles and fights with his thoughts, then it is all over for him,
as we will explain in more detail below in chapter 36. Therefore let us
be prepared and sing this verse with Moses and Isaiah: Christ is our
salvation, but in no other way than through the \"Psalm\".

\(10\) But this salvation or victory is against the conscience, against
sin, against the world, against the sects, and against Satan. For one
has no other need of salvation than against the cross and the evils,
that one, trusting in this \"psalm,\" says: Though I have sinned, yet
have I not sinned; though I die, yet will I not die 2c. But without
experience, these are empty words, and they are not understood.

**V. 3. You will draw water from the well of salvation with joy.**

So far he has described the service of the New Testament, namely the
preaching through the oral word, with which we praise Christ. But when
this word is preached, the outpouring of the Holy Spirit follows.
Therefore he says: \"You will draw water\", that is, the power and
effect and consolation of the Holy Spirit, as it is said in Joh. 7, 38.
39. Some take the fountain for holy baptism; but this seems to me to be
most simple, that one takes it for the whole gospel, that where the word
is, let it be where it will, there also the

Fountain. So here in Wittenberg is a fountain of salvation. So also in
other places where the word is taught. The apostles and other preachers
of the gospel can also be called \"fountains of salvation\" for the sake
of the word.

V. 4. **Give thanks to the Lord.**

This is to be understood of the reproduction of the gospel. This water
will also flow over to others: others will also be partakers of the
sacrifice and spirit of God.

**Preach his name (Invocate nomen ejus).**

The verbum \[invocare\] actually means to preach. But Alan is to note
that the name of Christ alone is to be preached, as he adds, \"Make
known his deeds.\" Adinventiones ejus, that is, \"his deeds,\" that he
bore our sin, that he suffered, that he rose again 2c.

**Proclaim how his name is so high.**

14 The pronoun \"his\" must be taken everywhere in such a way that there
is an emphasis on it, and that all others are excluded with it. As if he
wanted to say: This should be a daily practice, this should be preached
daily, that Christ\'s name alone is high and to be exalted. But I take
it as a verbal remembrance.

**V. 5. for he has proved himself glorious (Quia^1^ ) superbe fecit).**

15 That is, he gloriously overcame sin, death and Satan through his
resurrection.

**V. 6: Rejoice and glory, O inhabitant of Zion.**

\(16\) You have forgiveness of sins, peace, the Holy Spirit, therefore
be joyful and offer the sacrifice of praise to God. Let this be your
service, let this be your sacrifice, that you first accept these
benefits; then cheerfully give thanks for them, praise them, and be of
good cheer.

1\) Erlanger: Hui instead of: Huia.

246 L. xxii, i38-i4o. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 371-374.
247

**The thirteenth chapter.**

\(1\) What the prophet has spoken about so far is really a matter for
the Jewish people. For he has spoken both of the present kingdom of the
Jews and of the future kingdom of Christ. But we will not act
inconsistently if we start the second book here. For the prophet now
passes from the Jews to the neighboring Gentiles, and announces to them
their coming desolation.

Furthermore, the order of history gives an impulse here that Isaiah
prophesies against Babylon under Ahaz, since at that time the
Babylonians did not have the monarchy yet, but it came to them some time
later from the Assyrians. My opinion is this: Because it is probable
that these speeches were not written down (editos) by the prophet, but
were caught by the scribes; so the order of history was not observed by
them. Thus it is clear that the prophecy of Jeremiah was written out by
others, and the scribe is also named there \[Jer. 36:32\]. And also the
Psalter was compiled in this way, that there is no order of the Psalms.
We may think that this prophecy was written by the prophet himself or by
the scribes, but it is certain that what belongs to the time of Hezekiah
is anticipated (per anticipationem) and told in the time of Ahaz. And
also other prophets have done it in the same way. Thus in the 12th
chapter of Jeremiah those things are told, which should have been spared
until the 25th chapter. So also here before of Babel that is said, what
should have been said according to the historical order after the 40th
chapter under the king Hezekiah. And this is the first point, which
generally concerns the order of the prophet and the grammar.

3\) Secondly, it should be remembered that when the prophets speak of
God, they do not speak of God as He is in His majesty, but as He dwells
in the tabernacle of the congregation,

that is, not of God in and of Himself (absoluto), but of God clothed
with an outward service, just as our religion refers to Christ, who took
flesh and blood and was crucified, and not to God in His majesty apart
from Christ. So the Jews\' religion did not refer to God in His glory,
but to God above the cherubim. For since no one can think of His majesty
without danger, and since God in His glory cannot be comprehended by a
human mind, therefore God presented Himself, both to the Jews and to us,
not in His glory, but as weak and in a weak form.

Since the prophets praised this weak God, who was locked up in a certain
place, and threatened with his power as such, before which the greatest
empire that existed at that time would have to fear, they were laughed
at and taken for fools by the pagans, just as even today those are
laughed at by the Jews and Turks who boast of the crucified Christ. For
this reason God wanted to be known in the weak form, so that he would
put human wisdom to shame. For this is the highest wisdom, to cling to
this weak form of Christ crucified, and not to be offended by it, that
we know or think nothing else of God than that he is crucified. The
thoughts of His majesty are very dangerous. For an evil spirit can
disguise itself in the form of majesty; it cannot disguise itself in the
form of the cross. For in this he has been overcome and thrown to the
ground, therefore he also hates it in the most hostile way. So we may
understand from this that this prophecy was ridiculed and considered
foolish by all, since in it he threatens the devastation of the
exceedingly powerful monarchy of the Babylonians. Furthermore,
\"burden\" means a prophecy that announces a calamity.

248 xxn, **i4i-i43.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 13, 1-18.
**W.** vi, **374-378.** 249

V. i. 2. **throw up panier, on high mountains.**

This is a vivid description (hypotyposis), in which he describes the
thing as if one saw it happening at present, so that one might believe
him all the more. Further he understands by the \"mountains\" the
mountains, so around Babylon lay. As if he wanted to say: The enemies
are so near that one can see them from Babel on the mountains.

**Through the gates of the princes.**

6\. in Babylon.

V. 3. **I have commanded my sanctified ones.**

7\. I, namely the weak God, who dwell above the cherubim, and am
despised. But he calls \"sanctified\" the Persians and Medes, who are
prepared for the work and service of GOD, and destined to destroy the
Babylonians. For this means \"a sanctified one\".

**Who rejoice in my glory.**

8\. that is, who are happy because I overcome my enemies, because I
triumph over my enemies. Thus, the despised God attributes the victory
of the Medes to himself.

V. 4. **It is a shouting of a crowd.**

9\. a clamor of a roar or tumult. He continues here with the vivid
depiction of the thing.

V. 5. **From the end of heaven.**

10 That is, from a distance. This is a Hebrew way of speaking. For the
Hebrews call that \"sky\" as far as one can see with the eyes, which we
generally call the horizon.

**Along with the witness of his wrath.**

11\. these are the Medes and Persians.

V. 6. **hay.**

12\. as if to say: you are now merry and happy. But the time will come
when you will howl. The enemy will be here in a short time, for he is
already near. But his power is so great that you cannot resist it. Thus
he fills the Babylonians with terror, but he encourages the Persians to
attack the work freshly. For God has the victory in his hand.

**V. 7. 8. They will be afraid like a woman in childbirth.**

13 This is a great image that throws them into apparent death, from
which there is no certain escape.

**Fire red will be their faces.**

14 Facies combustae, which must be translated thus: Quia facies
flammarum sunt vultus eorum \[their faces look like flames of fire\],
that is, their faces are red from excessive fear.

**V. 9 For behold, the day of the Lord is coming.**

15 He continues to terrify the Babylonians. Note, it is called a day of
the Lord, as often as he visits either in mercy or in wrath. That he
says \"to disturb the land\" must be understood especially of the land
of the Babylonians.

**V. 10. For the stars in the sky.**

He describes in a theological way the state of mind of those who have
been pressed with a great misfortune. For to them, even the most lovely
light of heaven seems sad and dark.

**V. 11. I will afflict the ground because of its wickedness.**

17 He speaks only of the soil of Babylon, after the manner of the
Hebrews, as also the evangelist did: \"There went out a commandment from
the emperor Augustus, that all the world should be esteemed\" \[Luc. 2,
1.\], that is, the world, as far as Augustus was master over it.

**V. 12: That a man should be more precious than fine gold.**

18 There will be a great shortage of people as a result of this defeat.

**V. 13-18. Therefore I will move the heavens.**

19 Thus the Scripture speaks when it wants to indicate an imminent
change. But herewith he presents the thing very contemptuously, that he
compares such a big empire \"to a shattered deer\". And at the same time
the exceedingly cruel victory of the Medes is described herewith.

250xxn , 143-146. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, 37s-3 \"i. 251

V. 19. 20. **That even the Arabs do not make tents there.**

20 Hereby he indicates the utmost destruction and desolation. The Arabs
do not live in any particular place, but they move about with their huts
like robbers and maintain themselves by cattle breeding.

V. 21. 22. **But zihim (bestiae) will encamp there.**

In Hebrew there is the word \"Zihim\" which I believe means all unclean
birds and birds of prey, such as vultures, hawks, ravens, eagles 2c.

**And their houses will be full of Ohim (draconibus).**

22\) In Hebrew there is the word \"Ohim\" which I believe to be a
general name of all four-footed 1) wild animals that live in forests,
such as wolves, foxes 2c.

**And field spirits (pilosi) will bounce there.**

These are the ones we call forest devils and satyrs. For so, I believe,
Satan in this form often appeared to the pagans, so that he induced them
to idolatry. This is the origin of the worship of Pan and other field
gods.

We have now heard the simple story of how Babylon was to be destroyed,
which is nothing other than an image of a very sad tragedy, that so
great an empire should fall in so short a time and be destroyed from the
bottom up. This is therefore a lesson for the worldly regime, that we
should learn to be satisfied with little. For great empires are
generally nothing but great injustice. That is why great princes come to
such a miserable end. Not as if empires, or the administration of
empires, were an evil thing, but because human wisdom cannot use them
skilfully. For it is just as in the household; as when a father has a
prodigal son: the more munificent the father is toward him, the more he
brings through and consumes. This is the

1\) In the Jenaer and in the Erlanger there is a comma after
yuadrupsäurn.

The nature of human wisdom: when great honorary offices and riches fall
to it, it cannot use them without offending God and man, but it abuses
the good creatures of God against God and against the neighbor.

\(25\) For this reason, God is finally compelled to destroy great kings
and wipe out mighty empires for the sake of our wickedness. For this is
the way we humans are: if God gives nothing, we become unwilling; but if
He gives something, we become arrogant and abuse it according to our
desires, to insult our neighbor. Therefore, for the sake of the
wickedness of our heart, it is best to be content with little, as that
2) reminds us: Laudato ingentia rura, exiguum colito \[Great estates
should be praised; a small one should be cultivated\^. David and Solomon
undertook and accomplished great things, but they did so in the fear of
the Lord, despairing of their own wisdom and suggestions, unless they
had prosperity from God. All other kings and princes who have ruled
great empires trusting in their wisdom and powers have come to a sad
end, as that poet also testifies:

Ad generum Cereris sine caede et sanguine pauci

Descendunt reges, et sicca morte tyranni. [sFew kings die without murder
and bloodshed, and tyrants do not die a bloodless death\]. And our
present times have given many examples of this.]{.underline}

26 This passage also serves to let us know that kingdoms do not exist
through power or wealth, but through skillful and capable persons, who
are given by God Himself, as special and exceedingly high gifts of God.
Thus Hector complains in Virgil:

\... Si Pergama dextra

Defendi possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent. \[[If Troy could have been
defended with the fist, also mine could have done so\]. Therefore, if
GOD had ruined an empire]{.underline}

2\) In the Wittenberger on the edge: Oats.

3\) In the Wittenberg and in the Jena in the margin: duvsnalist O.

4\) Vir\^. lid. II, v. 291 sq.

252 L- xxn, I46-I48. Brief Interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 13, 21. 22. W.
vi, 381-384. 253

If he will break the eggs, he will take away from him wisdom and
prudence, and as the prophet says \[Isa. 3:4\], he will give boys to be
princes. \"If he will break the eggs, he setteth fools over them.\" The
Babylonians did not lack strength, wealth, or the number of their
subjects, and yet their empire came to an end because of a lack of
\[capable\] people. The same will happen to Germany, which has enough
men, weapons and horses, but lacks men of understanding; therefore, even
the things that serve to wage war will not be able to exist without
them. This is what God does: He separates the grain and then throws the
chaff into the fire.

As a theological lesson, this passage is about the power that God
attributes all power to Himself, that the kingdoms are established and
maintained by God, as He says \[v. 3\]: \"I have commanded My holy ones.
This passage serves to confirm the 13th chapter of the letter to the
Romans, against the rebels, that it is absolutely not permitted to
oppose violence, unless it is by a new command and commandment of God.
The Jews are also commanded to obey the king of Babylon in Jer. 27, 1)
17. And he punishes the wicked in a lawful way. Therefore he calls the
Medes his sanctified ones. So the Vandals just boasted that they were
called to destroy Rome. Therefore, let each one stay with his
authorities. If God wants to punish them, He will not do it through you,
but in His time through foreign enemies.

Now it is left to indicate also the secret interpretation. For if one
looks at it with diligence, the historical mind brings this with it. I
hold the simple histories very high; the secret interpretations do not
please me very much. For the secret interpretations are to be used as
ornaments and for the painting of the speech. And they are to teaching
what color is to a building; color does not build Hans, nor does it
support him, but only gives him an ornament. It is the same with the
secret interpretation. The histories, however, because

1\) In the issues: eap. 28.

they testify that God has always fulfilled either His threats or His
promises, they nourish both the faith and the fear of God in the hearts.

This history thus promises salvation to the godly: that just as the Jews
were redeemed by the exceedingly powerful and trustworthy Lord, so also
we shall be preserved after our enemies have perished. And she also
threatens the wicked with destruction, although this seems to be
impossible because of her strength, wealth, power and dignity 2c. Thus
Babylon, however strongly fortified and insurmountable it was, and ruled
arrogantly over the captive Jews, was nevertheless punished because of
its tyranny. This must be applied to similar dangers. For example:
although it seems impossible to me that I could be redeemed from death
and sin, it will happen through Christ. For here God shows us an example
that He will not abandon His saints even if they are already in the
midst of Babylon. This is the benefit of the histories, that they
instruct the consciences.

\(30\) Therefore, if I want to frighten the wicked and raise up the
godly so that they do not despair, I can use this history to call them
Babylon, which was unconquerable in strength and weapons; whereas the
Jews were oppressed and, being defeated, had only one salvation, so that
they had no hope of their salvation. If God was able to save these and
destroy those, what reason do we have to doubt His power and His will,
as if He would not or could not do the same against our enemies,
especially since we have experienced this in our time in a no less
desperate matter.

\(31\) What hope of salvation was there under the pope who held
everything with his ungodly teachings and tyranny? For it had never
occurred to me to attack him. But because God threatened the wicked in
the first commandment \[Ex. 20, 5\]: \"I am a zealous God, who punishes
the iniquity of the fathers,\" 2c.

254 L- xxn, 148-15\". Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 384-387.
255

The Cardinal overthrew the Pope at the time when the papacy was in the
highest security. For when I was in Augsburg, the Cardinal said to me:
\"What does the Pope ask about Germany? So great was their security; and
yet they have begun to fall, and are still falling. The sun is darkened
for them, and they are despondent and afraid. So one must remain with
history, and only then use the secret interpretations, for the sake of
the jewelry.

When inexperienced souls engage in secret interpretations, they cannot
hold on to the certain understanding of Scripture. And if the deal with
the pope had not kept me with the simple text of the Bible, I would have
become a useless chatterer of secret interpretations, like St. Jerome
and Origen. For this figurative way of speaking has something seductive
about it, from which the minds can hardly wriggle out again. Therefore,
you may, instructed by my example, be careful and follow the simple
histories and the plain text everywhere; afterwards it is well that you
can make secret interpretations without danger, as we also see that Paul
\[Gal. 4, 22. ff.\] used the secret interpretation for decoration.

33 Therefore, the correct secret interpretation of this passage is the
victory of conscience over death. For the law is a Cyrus, a Turk, a
cruel and powerful enemy, who stands up against the hopeful conscience
of the saints of works, who put their trust in their own merits. These
are the true Babylon, and this is the glory of Babylon, that it walks
along trusting in its own works. When the law comes and takes over the
heart with its terror, it pronounces the verdict that all our works, in
which we put our trust, are defiled and truly filthy, as Paul calls them
Phil. 3:8. Now that the law has revealed this defilement of our hearts
and works, what follows is the judgment of the law.

Thereupon, consternation, agony, and pain of childbirth; people are put
to shame, and the trust in works falls away, and what we see today
happens: whoever has lived in the monastery in trust in his
righteousness until now, leaves the monastic life, throws all the glory
of works into the dung, and looks only at Christ\'s merit and
righteousness, which is given to him by grace and for free. And this is
the desolation of Babylon.

The ostriches and field spirits that remain are Eck, Cochleus and others
who do not belong to this piece of the law. They howl and do not speak
with a human voice; they cannot raise and comfort a troubled conscience
with their teaching. Jacob and Israel alone are saved, that is, the
troubled consciences are raised; they know the tyranny of the pope; the
others worship him as the monarch of Babylon. Such are my secret
interpretations, which I approve, namely, which present to us the nature
of the Law and the Gospel.

**V. 22. And their time will come.**

\(35\) This is related to the preceding. For the pronoun \"her\" must
refer to Babylon, not, as some explain, to Christ, of whom he is not
speaking here.

Cap. 14, v. 1. 2. **For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob.**

The prophet comforts his own. It will happen one day, he says, that the
Babylonians will take you away captive. Then do not despair. For you
will surely be restored to your land, and God will have mercy on you,
and the Babylonians will be punished again for your sake, because of the
wrong they did to you, and will serve you.

256 L. xxii, isn-152. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 14, 3-9. W.
vi, 387-3so. 257

**The fourteenth chapter.**

**V. 3. and at the time when the Lord will give you rest.**

This chapter has the same content as the previous one. For since the
prophet foresaw that the Babylonians would make the Jews their servants
and would afflict them very severely, and that nothing but despair would
be left for his own in the greatest distress, he speaks here of the
future desolation of Babylon as if it were present, for the greater
strengthening of the faith of his people, and uses all kinds of images
to strengthen and comfort his own, so that the highest theology is
combined with the highest oratory.

For it is extremely difficult to bring the souls in the highest
misfortune from despair back to faith, that they believe in God, who
promises them salvation. For the flesh, before feeling the present
misfortune, cannot grasp the future help with the heart.

**From your misery and sorrow.**

3 That is, in the Babylonian captivity, in which you look like a woman
in childbirth, so that you may give birth to a new kingdom for Christ.

V. 4: **So you will speak such a proverb against the king.**

4 Divine salvations are such that when someone has been in the greatest
despair, and then is raised up by the word, he despises and scorns
nothing so much as the temptations he has been in. Thus there was a very
great fear of the pope, but now that we are freed from his tyranny,
nothing is more despised than he. Thus, at times, in private contests, a
small thing torments our heart, of which, when the contest is over, we
realize that it is a very ridiculous thing.

**V. 5. 6. the ruth.**

5 These are figurative names of a raging and cruel kingdom. As if he
wanted to say: The Lord has given you the scepter to preserve your own
and to protect them from violence and injustice; but now you abuse this
power against your own. Therefore you will be punished. For the kingdoms
are established for the sake of preservation. For this reason kings bear
the scepter, that they may judge and protect the good and punish the
evil. And the jewel of our kings is a golden apple, to indicate that
they should go forth with their judgment round, without regard to
persons. Furthermore, these reproaches hurt the outcast princes very
much, as they also comfort those who have endured their tyranny.

**V. 7. 8. The fir trees also rejoice over you.**

6 These are figurative speeches. For they imply that through the fall of
this great tyrant the world has received peace, but especially Judea,
which has an abundance of trees.

**V. 9. Hell below.**

\(7\) This is a beautiful and quite poetic decoration, with which the
prophet mocks the king with a very sure heart. For he imagines that
there is a scene in hell where the Babylonian king is received by other
kings, and that there are also persons there who reproach him for his
arrogance and cruelty, as in Lucian Diogenes ridicules Alexander. For
that he says, \"Hell trembles before thee,\" is to be understood in a
mocking way; as if we said, \"Eh, how the churchyard is so afraid of
thee.\" Furthermore, in Hebrew \"hell\" is called the place to which
body and soul go after death, but especially the place where the body
goes.

258 L. xxn, , 52-155. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 390-395.
259

**She awakens you all the goats of the world (Suscitavit tibi
gigantes).**

8 In Hebrew it reads: She raises the dead to you, all the goats of the
world. Thus he calls the princes and kings.

**V. 10. ii. Together with the sound of your harps.**

9 \[Concidit cadaver tuum in the Vulgate,\] which reads in the Hebrew:
\"Together with the sound of your harps\", that is: You will be cast out
to hell with your power and with your joy. But one would rightly call
the prophet a rebel, because he speaks so shamefully of the supreme
monarch. But he does it in order to raise the hearts of his people, so
that they do not despair of salvation.

**V. 12. How you fell from heaven.**

\(10\) Because people did not understand the oratory, they understood
this about the fall of the angel Lucifer, since it is a figurative
decoration. Therefore this so important error of the whole papacy, which
has taken this text of the fall of the angels, should move us to the
study of the learned sciences and the art of oratory, as things which
are most necessary to a theologian for the treatment of the holy
scriptures. The reason is therefore that the death of the king of
Babylon was as if the morning star fell from heaven and the dawn was
darkened. In this way the prophet mocks him.

\(11\) It must be noted here that nothing was more foolish than this
prophecy, both among the Babylonians and the Jews, when the Babylonian
monarchy was still in full bloom. But this too is to be noted, that
great kings do not bring their kingdoms with their counsels where they
think, but they fall already in the dawn, when they think they want to
rise to noon. We see this in Julius Caesar and others.

**V. 13-15. I will ascend into heaven. 1)**

12\. you have despised the Jewish people in comparison to you, along
with their god who is in the

1\) Erlanger: usoencinnt instead of: asoendam.

But now the contempt of this God is as much as if you would imagine to
go up to heaven, which is impossible. In this way, he describes the
king\'s trustworthy and secure thoughts through a poetic image; as if I
said: The pope is so trustworthy and presumptuous that he dares to
prescribe laws even to God, while the pope says that he does not want to
do so; nevertheless, he does it by ruling over the consciences.

**V. 16. 17. Who made the ground a desert.**

13 He understands the ground of the Jews, because he speaks of them in
particular. But the prophet indicates that the wicked have both shame
and an evil conscience after death.

**V. 18-20. All the kings of the Gentiles.**

14 To make the misfortune even greater, he compares him to other kings.
Others are buried in their kingdoms; but you, in your so great kingdom,
have not so much room as to be buried, but lie unburied, like one of the
rabble. It is a pity that the greater the kingdoms, the sadder the end
of those who govern them.

**Which descend to the cairns of hell.**

15\. fundamenta laci, so he calls stony or sandy oerter. ^g^)

**V. 21-23. Judge that one slay his children.**

People should punish only the one who sins. But God punishes even to the
third degree. Thus we read that Belshazzar, the grandson of this king,
was slain in bed by the Medes.

**V. 24-27. That Assyria would be crushed.**

17 Here he comes back to Sanherib, the king of Assyria, who was
mentioned above \[v. 12. ff\] in the 10th chapter. For the scribes did
not pay attention to the order.

g\) The edition of 1532 adds: Belshazzar was killed in bed by the Means.

260 L. xxn, 155-157. brief interpretation on Isaac, cap. 14, 24-29. W.
vi, 395-398. 261

since they have gathered the prophecy of the prophet. Because up to now
he has digressed to the Babylonian monarchy, which did not exist yet.
Now he comes again to the existing monarchy of the Assyrians. Thus, if I
wanted to speak about the fact that the kingdom of the pope will fall, I
could make a digression that God will destroy all the wicked.

will kill. After that I could come back to the matter puffing and say:
God will also destroy this present pope 2c. Furthermore, also the
Assyrian and Babylonian monarchy was one and the same monarchy. However,
it is distinguished because the seat of the empire was first in Assyria,
later in Babylonia.

**The fifteenth chapter.**

Cap. 14, 28. **In the year that King Ahaz died.**

1\. the chapters are divided unrhymed, therefore we want to make a small
change with the beginning of the chapters.

2 Above he spoke about Sanherib; this story happened in the fifteenth or
sixteenth year of Hezekiah. Now he returns from the first year of
Hezekiah, prophesying against the Philistines, who rejoiced at the death
of Ahaz. For they were afraid of this king, because of the alliance with
the Assyrians. For after he has punished his people according to the
teaching of the gospel, which commands that we should first pull the
beam out of our eyes \[Matth. 7, 5.\], he now digresses in several
chapters and turns to the neighbors of the Jews, proclaiming to them
their future misfortune, until he finally comes back to the king of
Assyria.

Furthermore, the Philistines were the most hostile to the Jews among all
the other neighbors. For the devil did not like the word of God and the
works of God among this people. Therefore, as often as the Jews were
oppressed by a calamity, they rejoiced over it, as we see in the books
of Kings, after Saul fell in battle. It is the same for us today:
although we have to suffer from many enemies, the red spirits, as the
Sacramentans and Anabaptists are, harbor the bitterest hatred against us
before others. Therefore, the prophet comforts his people here.

**V. 29. That the rod that smote thee is broken.**

4 This is that Ahaz, the very powerful king, died.

**For from the root of the serpent will come a basilisk.**

This is a sweet consolation, with which he sends out the faith of the
frightened people, who were distrustful of the powers of their young
king. ^h^) But he calls Ahaz a serpent, and Hezekiah a basilisk, because
he would be much harder on the Philistines than Ahaz had been. For he
smote the Philistines as far as Gaza, as we read in the other book of
Kings \[Cap. 18:8\].

\(6\) But this is a proverbial saying, by which is signified that things
are easily changed, but seldom for the better. Thus we have changed the
seducers, but not improved them. For they have become heretics instead
of papists \[which they were\]. Thus hypocrites are mistaken for
hypocrites, tyrants for tyrants. So this saying serves against the
excess. For this is how it is: no one considers the goodness of the
thing he owns until it is gone. So also in the house a servant, a maid,
for the sake of a grievous fault, gets her parting, and in her place
another maid or servant is hired, who has twofold inconvenience and far
less good in himself.

7 Furthermore, the prophet applies this saying against presumption, as
if to say:

h\) Instead of the preceding in § 5, the 1532 edition has: This is a
spprüchwörtlicher Ausspruch.

2626 . xxii, 157-15\". Interpretations, on the prophets. W. vi, 398-402.
263

You are sure, you think you have now survived all danger after the death
of Ahaz. But it will not happen 2c. But it is asked here, why the pious
king Hezekiah is called a basilisk? I answer: So also Christ calls
himself a death by the prophet, and a pestilence of death \[Hos. 13,
14.\].

**V. 30. For the firstfruits of the meager shall feed.**

The Jews are like a small and poor herd, the Philistines are mighty; yet
the Jews have this, that they are \"firstfruits,\" that is, beloved and
chosen of God, who, as God\'s own, though poor, shall be quiet and
secure in hope.

**V. 31. Howl, Thor.**

9\. where there is only a public place, a gate or a stage, there run
together.

Not to rejoice, as you are doing now, but to weep over your misfortune.
This seems to be impossible in an active and in a suffering way (active
et passive) before it happens.

**From midnight comes a smoke.**

This is a description of the Assyrian war army. But in German, too, we
use \"fire\" figuratively for misfortune.

**V. 32. Zion was founded by the Lord.**

\(11\) This is a great comfort to the afflicted kingdom of Judah, that
the mightiest enemy should perish, but they should be preserved. For in
prophesying evil to the neighboring nations, he does not intend both to
frighten them and to comfort his people and set them on fire against
their enemies with whom they were surrounded.

**The sixteenth chapter.**

001 This is a prophecy against Moab. As he ascribes vengeance to the
Philistines, so he ascribes presumption to the Moabites. For they were a
very proud people, because of the great fruitfulness of their fields and
other gifts of which they abounded.

Cap. 15, i. **Disturbance comes at night.**

2\. he speaks as of a present thing, and says: It will be devastated as
easily as if someone takes a city that lies buried in sleep and
drunkenness. With the word \"night\" he indicates at the same time the
presumption and security.

**Ar**

3\. is the city which the Greeks called Ariopolis.

**Kir in Moab** (murus Moab).

4\. I take \"Kir\" as the proper name of a city.

**V. 2. They go up to Baith and Dibon to the altars.**

\(5\) Those who become proud in good fortune become so downcast and
fearful even by a little misfortune that they cannot be raised up. In
this way he speaks here of the Moabites.

6 Furthermore, Nebo and Medbah were cities in Gad and Reuben. Either the
Moabites took them again, or gave the same names to other cities. What
the Latin translator has given: Ascendit domus, is, I believe, the
proper name of a temple: \"They go up to Baith and Dibon.\"

**All heads are shorn.**

7 These are signs of great mourning, after the manner of this people.

**V. 3. 4. hesbon.**

8\. a city in the tribe of Reuben.

**264** HH\' 1S9\--I62. Brief Interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 15, 4-9.
16, 1-5. W. vi, 402-4vs. **265**

**Jahza**

Also lies in the territory of the tribe of Reuben.

V. 5 **My heart cries out to Moab.**

\(9\) This passage is not well translated \[in the Vulgate\], and must
be given thus: \"My heart cries out to Moab; their fugitives, from the
three-year-old heifer to Zoar,\" add: \"they flee. But I take this to
mean that it is spoken in the person of the prophet, and as if he were
mocking the Moabites because they are so downcast and terrified.
Furthermore, he calls Moab \"a heifer of three years,\" proverbially,
because of the abundant pasture and other advantages of which this land
abounded, just as a heifer of three years is fertile and gives much
milk. Thus it is said of Ephraim in the prophet Hosea \[Cap. 4, 16.\],
\"Ephraim runs like a mad cow.\"

**Luhith \[Horonaim\].**

These oerter we do not know.

**V. 6. 7. the waters of Nimrim.**

\(10\) I consider that the prophet speaks in images, that these oerters
are deserted by regrets and inhabitants.

**Across the Willow Brook.**

11\. I would like to understand by it the brook Gabboth, which lay
beyond the willow brook.

**V. 8. Cries go up in the borders of Moab.**

That is, there is weeping and shouting everywhere.

**V. 9. I will let more come to this through Dimon.**

\(13\) He calls the nobles of Moab the lions of Moab, as if to say that
both the nobles and the rest of the common people will be more severely
afflicted.

**Cap. 16, 1. Dear, send, you sovereigns lambs of Sela from the desert
(Emitte agnum Domine**), 1)

14 Thus it must be translated, \"Ye princes of the land, send forth
lambs from Selah.

1\) This is how it is written in the Vulgate and in the 1532 edition.
The other editions have changed Domino to Domino.

the desert.\" Jerome twists it even evil on the holy virgin Mary. I also
do not want to follow the opinion of the Jews that I should think that
the Moabites were not under the rule of Hezekiah at that time. My
opinion is therefore this, that it is a mocking speech (*ironia*): Send
now sacrifices to the temple of the Lord, whether you can perhaps avert
the forthcoming evil from you. How does this devotion suddenly strike
you? But this worship will not help you; the calamity that is about to
befall you will not be helped by any sacrifice.

V. 2. **But like a bird flitting away, driven from its nest.**

This is a beautiful image: Like a bird from the nest, you will be driven
out of the kingdom.

**Arnon.**

What it is, I do not know. But I think it is a border town of the
Moabite country, conveniently located for robbers.

V. 3. **Collects Rath.**

That is, you have to flee badly; now use your wisdom, make shade for
yourself against the heat, that is, make a fortress for yourself against
this misfortune. Thus it is a constant mockery and ridicule.

**Hide the chased.**

\(17\) Dear, hide the wretched people under these shadows, that they may
be hidden under them. As if to say: You will not be able to protect or
help them in any way.

V. 4. **Thus the driver will have an end.**

These are nothing but mocking speeches. There is no doubt that you will
find so much protection and help that you can avert such a great
misfortune and help your wretched citizens. What I have made miserable,
you save from the destroyer.

**V. 5. But a chair will be prepared by grace.**

19 Hereby he turns again to his own, and comforts them. As proud as Moab
is

266 k. xxn, 162-164. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 405-408.
267

may be, it will nevertheless perish. But we will remain; and we will
remain in such a kingdom, in which there will be no raging and
blustering, but mercy, not hypocrisy, but truth,^i^ ) in which the king
will not only judge rightly for his own person, but will also see to it
that the others judge in the same way, so that the poor will not be
oppressed.

**V. 6 But we hear of the arrogance of Moab.**

20.^k^ ) This is part of the confirmation of the promise. Do not be
afraid or lose heart when you hear the arrogant Moab, whose pride and
anger are greater than his power, but despise him, for he will surely
perish.

**V. 7 Therefore one Moabite will howl over another.**

Moab ad Moab, that is, one Moabite over another.

**Over the foundations of the city of KirHareseth, the paralyzed will
sigh.**

That is, the mob will mourn the miserable fall of its princes.
\"Paralyzed\" he calls the lowly rabble. \"Foundation\" he calls the
princes.

**V. 8. His noble vines.**

\(22\) This is figurative, meaning that the Assyrians will take all the
young men of Moab away to their own land.

**V. 9. Therefore I weep.**

23\. the prophet speaks in the person of Moab: I, Moab, weep 2c.

**For a song has fallen into your summer, and into your harvest.**

\(24\) In the vintage and in the harvest, the peasant rejoices and is
glad. But here it is a mocking speech, with which the conqueror mocks
the conquered. The Ge-

i\) From here to the end of the paragraph, the 1532 edition has: But he
points to the kingdom of Hezekiah.

k\) Instead of s 20, the 1532 edition has: He speaks: The arrogance of
this great speaker is known, and yet he will perish.

The cry of your enemies is heard in your harvest, that is, your work is
enjoyed by another. For so it happens to the wicked: when they are in
the vintage, another reaps. So the work saints enjoy no fruit of their
righteousness in the danger of death.

**V. 10. They do not press wine in the winepresses.**

\(25\) By these images he indicates that they will perish and be
devastated.

**V. \`\`. That is why my heart is humming.**

26 This is also spoken in imitation; that is, my body will ache with
groaning and pain.

**V. 12. Then it will be revealed how Moab is weary.**

27 Hereby he also mocks the Moabite god and religion. Where are your
gods now? As also Moses says, 5th book 32, 38: Let your gods arise and
help you. ^l^) As if he wanted to say: then their vain worship will come
to light.

This is an excellent description of hypocrisy. For the hypocrites, when
their hearts are taken up with an ungodly opinion of God, are far more
fierce in their deeds than the truly godly in the true service of God.
And this is the first retribution of the godless, that they are crushed
by their work, which they voluntarily take upon themselves. The other
retribution is that all their work in time of need is vain and of no use
at all. That is why they bear their misfortune with the greatest sorrow,
and see nowhere a hope to counsel themselves. Therefore he saith, The
time shall come when it shall be made manifest how Moab is weary in his
altars.

29 On the other hand, true godliness, knowing that it serves Christ,
suffers outwardly, but overcomes the cross through the trust it has in
Christ.

\(30\) Therefore, let us beware of ungodly doctrines that affect both
the body and the mind.

l\) From here to § 31 inol. the edition of 1532 has only the following:
Thus, those who have a false religion, at the time of danger, are
abandoned both by their God and by men.

**268** L. xxii, 164-167. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 16,
12-14. W. vi, 408-412. **269**

also corrupt the soul. For where the word and the light are lost,
darkness remains, and what is written in Deut. 28:64 comes to pass:
\"You will serve other gods, wood and stones. And so it must inevitably
come to pass when we depart from the true God, who alone can and will
have patience with us if we only hold fast to the Word. For although
temptations and the cross follow, the conscience is happy and at peace
because of the trust in the mercy of God. On the other hand, when the
word is gone, the text says, one serves terror and sorrow with body and
soul. This is the fate of all the wicked, as we have experienced in the
papacy, since neither frequent confession, nor hard penances, nor
pilgrimages, nor masses, nor any other works could calm the conscience,
which was in constant fear. Therefore, we have labored body and soul,
and yet we have not obtained the forgiveness of sins. This is the fruit,
this is the reward of forsaking the true God.

31 Therefore let us give thanks to God that we have been saved from
foreign gods, that is, from false trust. For this is a strange god, in
whom, apart from the Word, we put our trust. Thus my works, if I put my
trust in them, are strange gods; so also the vow of a monk, so chastity
2c., and they can be

do not satisfy my conscience. The reason is that there is always a lack
of our works. Even if a monk has lived chastely, he has felt heat 2c.
Hence there are infinite defects in our works; therefore fatigue must
necessarily follow from them. But to believe in Christ is sweet, because
there we have forgiveness of sins. Now if we sin a little, it is not
imputed. But it is clear from this passage that Moab must have been a
hypocritical and superstitious people, as Pabstry is today.

V. 13. 14. **As the years of a day laborer are.**

\(32\) As if they were hired for a certain time, for a certain wage, and
after it was over, they were to be turned out of the house.

**The glory of Moab.**

33\. that is, the kingdom, the religion, the power, the laws, the
nations, the young people 2c. Thus the Holy Scriptures contain heaps of
examples from which we learn that God resists the hopeful and gives
grace to the humble \[1 Peter 5:5\]. We only want to wait a little and
endure the adversities, then we will also see in this time of ours how
the sinners will be rewarded; yes, we have already seen it to a great
extent.

**The seventeenth chapter.**

\(1\) Hitherto he prophesied against those that lie toward the morning
and evening; now he turns toward the north, and prophesies against
Damascus, which was the capital of the kingdom of Syria.

2 But at the same time he understands the captivity of the kingdom of
Israel. And this therefore: Israel is accused everywhere because of this
unfaithfulness, that it wages war against Judah, and moreover unites
itself with the foreigners against the same. Because it is now united
with

and the king of Syria, and made Judah desolate; therefore they are taken
together in punishment, and it is proclaimed beforehand to both of them
that they should be destroyed and made desolate by the king of Assyria.
But it seems that this prophecy was proclaimed under the king Ahaz.

**V. 1. 2. Aroer.**

3\. \"Aroer\" is the name of a city in the tribe of Reuben, which
belongs to the kingdom of Judah.

270 L. xxn, 167-170. interpretations On the Prophets. W. vi, 412-410.
271

belonged. But here I take it as a generic name; as if to say, \"The
cities on the heath,\" the cities that lie in the plain will all be laid
waste, that herds will graze there, so that Aroer means a plain on which
shrubs grow.

**V. 3: And the fortress of Ephraim shall be finished.**

4\. adjutorium Ephraim translate: \"stronghold Ephraim. He calls the
kingdom of Syria because the kingdom of Israel had united with the
Syrians and relied on the help of the Syrians; as we read above Cap. 7,
2.

**Like the glory of the children of Israel.**

That is, both the Syrians and Israel will be destroyed.

**V. 4-6 For it will be as when one gathers grain in the harvest.**

This is a terrifying similitude. He describes the king of Assyria as a
reaper who at harvest time entered the valley of Rephaim (which is near
Jerusalem in the evening), that is, the fat kingdom of Israel, and mowed
it down in such a way that he carried away the princes and nobles,
leaving only the poor rabble and the least people.

**V. 7. 8. In time man shall cleave unto him that made him.**

7 Thus necessity will force them to flee to the kingdom of Judah and
from the gods they have made for themselves to God who made them. Here
the objection could be made: Are not the Ark of the Covenant and the
Temple in Jerusalem also works of human hands? But here the theological
rule applies that one must look at every work to see whether it has
God\'s word or not. Whichever works are done by God\'s command, God does
them through us, as His instruments. Thus, works of the law are called
those that are done according to the requirements of the law. But those
works that are done without God\'s command are the works of our hands,
and because they are without God\'s word, they are ungodly and
condemned, especially if they are done by us.

the conceit comes to it, as if one becomes just thereby; therefore they
are punished also here.

**V. 9. At that time the cities will be of their strength.**

\(8\) It is uncertain whether he calls \"the cities of strength\"
because of the weapons and fortifications, or because of the religion
and service of the idols on which they relied. But I prefer to
understand it from the religion, that it means those cities in which
they worshipped the idols with special zeal.

**As a forsaken branch and twig, so forsaken was before the children of
Israel.**

\(9\) It is a likeness. Just as the people of Israel, when they first
took the land of Canaan, devastated it with sword and fire, leaving only
a few branches and twigs, that is, a few people, so it will be with the
king of Assyria; he will devastate everything.

**V. 10. For you have forgotten God, your salvation.**

\(10\) This is the guilt for which Israel is devastated, because it has
forgotten God. If this guilt is followed by such a severe punishment,
one can see what is to be expected from Germany, which not only forgets
God, but also despises Him, provokes Him to anger, persecutes Him and
detests Him.

**That\'s why you\'re going to put funny plants.**

11\. he persists in trusting in his religion. Therefore one must take
this, not from the plants of the temporal, but of the spiritual kingdom,
that is, from religion, that the plants are the disciples who have been
taught hypocrisy, as with us the monks and the whole papacy have been.
Translate: \"funny plants\". For he implies that hypocrisy and one\'s
own righteousness tickle the flesh, and are pleasant; no one persecutes
them, but all admire them.

**V. 11: That the seed may grow in time.**

12\) This indicates the zeal of the hypocrites and the heretics; they
diligently plant disciples,

1\) In the Jena and the Erlanger: held:

**272** L. xxn, i7u-i72. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 17, 11-14.
W. v i, 415-419. **273**

They force and drive so that theirs may grow and flourish, and are
always more ardent and diligent in the propagation of their errors than
the godly in the true service of the Word. And this is because Satan
resists the godly; but Satan not only does not prevent the sectarians
and heretics, but also encourages and incites them.

Ablata est messis.

13\. this whole passage should be translated like this: Jucundas
plantationes plantabis, et palmites externis (id est, hostibus)
seminabis. In die plantationis tuae magnum studium, ut mane semen tuum
germinet; verum acervus messis in die haereditatis erit dolor afflicti
etc. fLovely plantations thou shalt plant and cuttings thou shalt put dn
the strangers (that is, the enemies). In the time of thy planting thou
shalt have great zeal, that thy seed may soon spring up, but the heap of
the reaped, in the time of the inheritance, shall be the sorrow of one
afflicted 2c.) Such a beginning it gains with the works of ungodliness;
as it is said in Psalm \[Ps. 1, 4. 6.) that they shall have destruction
for a reward. This is how I understand this passage of the works of
ungodliness, or idolatry. But it can also be understood of\*worldly
rule, of laws and riches, and of earthly service. But I do not know
which of both opinions comes closest to the history of the part,
although both can lie in the history of the text.

**V. 12. O woe to the multitude of such a great people!**

14 Here he attaches a promise and a consolation for the people of Judah,
that they should not be afraid of the king of Assyria, for he will
perish; as was said above \[Cap. 14, 25.\] But the images are known,
that by rivers, mountains, trees 2c. the princes are signified.

**V. 13. He will rebuke them.**

The history of Sanherib will be told below in chapter 37.

**V. 14. Around the evening.**

16\. he speaks of a future thing as if it were present, because the
terrified souls cannot be sufficiently raised up. He says: \"Fear will
last from evening until morning, then there will be redemption and
salvation. But the distressed souls cannot glanbeu this. For the
sensation of terror is eternal, and all affliction, according to our
sensation, is perpetual. And there is no one who can see the end of the
temptation at the time when he is in the evil hour of the temptation.

\(17\) Therefore, we should learn that at the time when we are
challenged, we should not judge according to our feelings, but according
to the word of God. This word promises that all temptation is only a
time of evening, followed by the morning time, that is, comfort. But the
flesh does the opposite, forsakes the word, and directs its thoughts
only to the present sensation of affliction, and judges according to the
sensation. Therefore, it cannot imagine an end to the temptations in its
heart.

18 Therefore Athanasius was right. When he heard that Julianus was
following him, he answered: Julianus is a small cloud that will soon
disappear. We too shall follow his example in our misfortune, and we
shall learn from experience that God\'s word is true, which will not
deceive us. And this comfort of Isaiah belongs not only to Hezekiah, but
also to us, who are attacked and assaulted by these very enemies, with
these very temptations, through these very same pursuits. So we can be
challenged, but not overcome, if we stay with the word. For we are
founded on the rock, Christ. Therefore, even if a temptation comes, it
will not last long, but it will be an evening, which will soon be
followed by the joyful light of day.

274 L. xxn, I72-N4. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 419-423. 275

**The eighteenth chapter.**

Here he speaks of the peoples who live on the shore of the Red Sea, as
-a are the Troglodytes, Egyptians, Arabs, Ishmaelites 2c., who live from
robbery, and have a great experience in navigation, and know how to
handle the ships well. To them he proclaims first war, then famine. But
it is still doubtful which people he is talking about. It seems to me
that he is still talking about the king of Assyria, who, like a flood of
sin, oppressed this part of the earth with his weapons.

**V. 1. Woe to the land that sails in the shade.**

002 That is, Woe to the land that hath the shadow of sails (*umbras
alurum*), that is, which hath many harbors or ships. For the wings of a
ship are the sails of ships. But \"shadow\" means the harbors. Moreover,
that he says \"shadow\", he also indicates the confidence that they have
in their ships.

**V. 2. that sends messages on the sea.**

3\. this means their trade, that they are merchants.

**Go, you swift messengers.**

4 This is a threat of the prophet. But it is a figurative speech; as if
he wanted to say: The rumor of the king of Assyria will come to them,
who will devastate them.

**To the people torn and plundered.**

This is the one who takes everything and plunders everything. Such
people, as they say nowadays, are the Turks or Tartars, who live only by
robbery.

**To the people measured out and trodden down here and there (ad g.entem
exspectantem).**

6 Translate: Ad gentem mensuratam sive dimensam, that is, \"that divides
itself everywhere, and in turn is robbed everywhere.\" A people who rob
and plunder everywhere; people who rob both their neighbors and
themselves among themselves. The secret interpretation of Oecolampad is
all too forced.

**To whom the streams of water occupy his land.**

7\. \"The water streams,\" that is, the neighboring peoples who dwell
along the rivers of Ethiopia.

Ad montem. ^1^)

Does not appear in Hebrew.

V. 3: **All you who dwell on the earth.**

8 That is, of that part which they inhabit, even as we have another
earth than the Italians. And here he prophesies the war.

**V. 4-6. I will keep still and look.**

He proclaims famine. I will strike the earth in such a way that in the
midst of growth everything will burn and perish from excessive heat. \"I
will keep still,\" that is, I will not make it rain, I will cease to
bless, I will leave it to its attacks. However, I do not dislike the
secret interpretation that by the \"heat\" 2) one understands the king
of Assyria who should spoil the bloom of the youth. Which of both
opinions comes closest to the history, I do not know, but they are both
good.

V. 7. **At that time the torn and plundered people will bring gifts.**

10 These words add a consolation. The remnant of this people shall one
day be converted to Christ. Thus we read in the Acts of the Apostles
\[Cap. 8, 26. ffI of the queen from Mohrenland, and of others. Also many
holy men hid in those places in the times of Augustine and Athanasius,
and it seems as if the book de vitis patrum originated mainly from this
corner of the earth. But I like this passage mainly because we see that
the Gospel generally occupies those places where Satan ruled mightily
before. These are works of the glory and majesty of God.

1\) These words are not found here in our Vulgate, but only at the end
of the seventh verse.

2\) In the 1534 edition, in the Wittenberg and in the Jena: istum
instead of: aestum.

**276** u. xxii, 174-176. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 19, 1-7.
W. vi, 423-426. **277**

**The nineteenth chapter.**

1 Now he also prophesies misfortune over Egypt. For the king of Assyria
was at that time the common breed of all the neighboring nations, as the
Turk is today.

V. 1. **Behold, the LORD will ride on a swift cloud.**

2 That is, God will send the king of Assyria over the Egyptians like a
swift cloud. In this way, He indicates both the swift arrival of the
enemy and the easy victory.

**Then the idols in Egypt will tremble before him.**

3\. \"The idols in Egypt\" are not the silver and stone images, but
their religion and worship, and 1) that with which they worship GOD;
these \"shall shake\". For hypocrisy and idolatry cannot bear the
chastening rod of God and His wrath, because they do not have the word
of God and the right opinion of God. Godliness alone can endure in
tribulations because it has the Word and relies on the Word. Therefore,
instead of a proverb, this should serve us to say: When the Lord comes
to Egypt, the idols in Egypt tremble before Him; that is, the hearts of
the hypocrites cannot rise up against the imminent danger. This is a
theological lesson.

**And the hearts of the Egyptians will become cowardly.**

\(4\) When confidence in religion is gone, trembling and unrest of heart
follow. Thus, today we have a common counsel against our enemies, that
we command our cause to God through diligent prayer; but they, because
they do not have the Word, and are stuck in a godless worship, wear
themselves out with endless plots, with which they have done nothing for
so many years. Thus, after their idols have been set over the hau-

1\) Erlanger: 6t tta- Sk/?a\<7\^ai-a; the 6t is too much.

f they are without God\'s word, they can find neither measure nor aim in
their plots against us; their hearts are restless, and they seek to
counsel their wicked cause in every way; but in vain.

V. 2. **And I will set the Egyptians against each other.**

\(5\) When confidence in religion is put to shame, rioting and disunity
inevitably follow, which are the beginning of the fall of an empire.

V. 3. **and the courage of the Egyptians among them shall perish (et
dirumpetur spiritus**).

Translate: Et deficiet spiritus, that is, they will lack courage. This
is how God contends against his enemies; first he deprives them of heart
and courage.

**Then they will ask their idols.**

If they lack good counsel, they will take refuge in idols. So now they
make processions or supplications when there is danger, by which they
provoke God to anger.

V. 4. **But I will deliver the Egyptians into the hand of cruel lords.**

8\. into the hands of the Assyrians.

V. 5. **and the water in the lakes will dry up.**

9 The Egyptians are famous for fishing; therefore he describes their
misfortune by a simile taken from the fishermen. \"The waters shall dry
up,\" that is, the king of Assyria shall plunder those who dwell by
these waters.

**The current.**

10\. the Nile River, that is, those who live on the Nile.

V. 6. 7. **the lakes at dams.**

11 These are all figurative speeches; that is, the citizens in the
cities will become completely exhausted.

278 L. **xxn, 176-179. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi,
426-429.** 279

**V. 8-10. And the fishermen will mourn.**

The Egyptians will no longer engage in trade or commerce. For he remains
in the image of the fishermen.

**V. 11. 12. The princes of Zoan are fools.**

\(13\) Here the prophet mocks the Egyptians, as if to say, \"You
Egyptians boast of great wisdom, that you are the oldest and have the
oldest community. How is it then that you do not know this, that you do
not foresee such a great calamity?

**I am the wise man\'s child.**

14 This was the praise of Egypt at that time. But this is the
theological rule, that all the wicked, if they are to perish, have in
themselves the kind that is described here, that they become obdurate,
arrogant, and obstinate, and live without all fear of God, saying:
Peace, peace. For an ungodly man does not believe that a calamity is
about to befall him. Thus the Jews, when they were besieged in all
places, were yet utterly hardened.

\(15\) Therefore the downfall of the papists is quite certain, who now
triumph in all security, and against all threats, against all
admonitions, against all entreaties and supplications, sing: \"I am the
child of the wise, and come from ancient kings. Therefore either
judgment or some other great plague will come upon them. For the nearer
they are to your calamity, the more they are hardened. Therefore they
invoke their wisdom and antiquity. Will you alone, they say, condemn the
church, which is so old? Are you alone wise? Or do you think that our
ancestors saw nothing? Have all those who have gone before you been
mistaken? 2c. This has been the first objection of the wicked in the
world against the godly, and will be the last. For by these two things,
the conceit of wisdom, and the glory of antiquity, the hearts of the
wicked are puffed up. Thus the diatribe of Erasmus is nothing else than
what is written here: I am a son of the ancients. For he invokes the
prestige of the church fathers. Against this arrogance the prophets
argued, and we contradict it today.

too. But we don\'t fix anything until they will drive it.

16 Furthermore, \"Zoan\" is one of the most famous cities in Egypt. I
hold however for the fact that by the pronunciation Zoan was changed
into Thoom.

**V. 13: They seduce the cornerstone of the families together with
Egypt.**

17 He calls the king of Egypt the \"cornerstone of the nations. But
notice the outcome of the plots that the wicked make, which is that they
are deceived. Nothing is more powerful in appearance than these, so they
cannot get rid of them, but in the end they fail.

**V. 14 For the LORD has poured out a spirit of deceit among them.**

\(18\) That is, the Lord made the Egyptians drunk, that they should err
and be deceived in all their ways and doings. This is an excellent
figure, and is often used in the Scriptures, that the wicked in
misfortune are like a drunken man, who can neither stand still nor see
nor counsel, but staggers uncertainly here and there. The wicked do not
believe this until they learn it. \"So then they have waited too long,
that all their attempts are too short for them.\" For before calamity
they have the appearance of wisdom, and continue safely in their
counsels. But when adversity really overloads them, \"they are veritable
frauds, as one goes out here and the other there. Furthermore, where
there are many and various suggestions, destruction inevitably follows,
just as, on the other hand, where there are many wise men who deliberate
together and are united, there is salvation. And so it is with the
misfortune of the wicked.

19\) But our glory is that even though we have the cup, that is, the
cross,

m\) From here on to § 20 inal. the edition of 1532 has only the
following: GOD makes them drunk, that they may err and be deceived in
all their works. But the Christians have this glory, that although they
have the cup (that is, the cross), yet they do not become drunk like the
wicked, with whom is added to the misfortune that they have no counsel
to escape. For they do not have the Word to guide and comfort them in
the midst of their tribulations, so they must inevitably fall into
despair at last. They cannot teach others or raise them up, but they
spit on them. All their advice is spit and filth.

280 **X.XI1, 179-I8I.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 19, 14-19.
**W. VU429-4N.** 281

We do not become drunk like the wicked, who still have this misfortune,
that they have neither hope nor counsel to get through anywhere. But we
have counsel in the midst of calamity, and certain hope of salvation.
For our God is a strong God, and our \"Counsel\", as the Scriptures call
Him, who by His Word gives and directs us counsel in the midst of our
calamities. For although misfortune naturally hurts us all, we do not
all become drunk. Only those who are without the Word become drunk with
misfortune, that is, they become uncertain and despair. But we have the
Word, which gives us counsel; as it bites Ps. 119:24: \"Thy testimonies
are my counsellors.\"

20 This reminds us that we endure in the cross, believing it to be a
discipline of the Lord for our good. Then it also sets before us
Christ\'s example that the disciple is not above his master, and that
our patience pleases God, who fei him the most acceptable sacrifice, as
Ps. 51:19 says. Thus hearts are established by the word; but the wicked,
not having this word, nor believing it, become weak in soul and body,
and despair; whereupon they take refuge in their own proposals, which
are unclean spit, and filthiness, by which they defile themselves and
others.

V. 15. **And Egypt will have nothing.**

\(21\) Both the authorities will lack subjects and the teachers will
lack students.

V. 16. 17. **And Egypt will be afraid of the land of Judah.**

\(22\) As if to say, They laugh at me now and do not believe me when I
predict these things. But it will happen then, when this will be
fulfilled, that they will also tremble before the name of the country in
which I have dwelt. They will think back to my prophecy, and will fear
more and more. \"Will worry, there may come two more Isaiahs.\" Thus the
fools (Phryges)^1^ ) become wise too late, and then they imagine far
crueler things in their thoughts than they suffer.

1\) according to your saying that the Phrygians

be improved by beatings. -

V. 18. **At that time five cities will speak according to the language
of Canaan.**

\(23\) Hitherto he has proclaimed calamity; now he adds a promise. For
the divine vengeance always receives some who remain, except in Sodom
and Gomorrah, which he has set as an example of the punishment that is
to be inflicted on the wicked on the last day of judgment. But because
the Egyptians had been more favorable to the Israelite people than the
rest of the Gentiles, therefore he adds here such a glorious promise
that they should be converted to Christ. For I understand the words of
the prophet to be about the propagation of the gospel, and not about the
propagation of the law before Christ, as is said because of the altar
built in Egypt \[v. 19\], because it was not permitted to erect an altar
elsewhere, when the true worship and temple still stood. Therefore this
promise was fulfilled after the preaching of Christ 2c.

**Five cities.**

\(24\) That is, some, not all, to imply that some believe, others
resist. For a definite number is put for an indefinite number; as
elsewhere it is said of five pounds, of five foolish virgins 2c.

**And shall swear by the LORD of hosts.**

25\. to swear is to vow to God, to praise him, to honor him, to worship
him.

\(26\) \"The language of Canaan\" is the Hebrew language used by the
holy patriarchs, which is believed to have been lost in captivity. He
says that they will learn it, so that it contains a prophecy; that is,
they will come over to our service, they will believe in God, Christ,
with us.

**Irheres.**

27\. it is said to be Heliopolis.

V. 19. **At the \"same\" time the altar of the Lord will be in the midst
of Egypt.**

28\. He says of an altar that is to be in the midst of Egypt and in the
borders of Egypt land. Therefore it cannot be understood of a fleshly
altar, but it is

282 L- xxii, isi-184. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 433-436.
283

means that Christ will be worshipped everywhere and the Word will be
preached everywhere. This is our one altar on which praise and
thanksgiving are offered to God for the grace shown in Him.

**V. 20.^1^ ) Which will be a sign and testimony.**

29 He says this in comparison to the Jews. That altar will not be for
ceremony or splendor, as with the Jews, but for sign and testimony, that
is, to teach the Word. This is the only service of the New Testament
that we render to God, that we preach the benefits that God has done for
us sinners in Christ. Thus, in one word, he abolishes all the splendor
of the sacrifices and slaughtered animals of the Old Testament.

**They will cry out to the Lord.**

30 There will not only be teaching and an abundance of the word, but
there will also be prayer, as the other part of the service, so that the
spirit of grace and prayer will be connected with each other \[Zech.
12:10\]. Because the cross follows the word, prayer is necessary.

**And he will send them a Master and Savior.**

31 That is, he will give them teachers who can save and teach them by
the word.

**V. 21. and will serve him with sacrifice.**

Previously, he said that the altar was erected for teaching, not for
sacrifice. Therefore, what he says here about the sacrifices must be
explained from the preceding. Because the following word must always be
explained from the previous one. Thus, because in the first book of
Samuel \[Cap. 28, 3. ff.\] it was said before that Samuel had died, and
afterwards it follows that his form was brought forth by the soothsayer,
we must believe that this is only a deception, but not the truth.

1\) In the editions this Bible text with its interpretation (certainly
by an oversight) stands only after what we bring under § 30. This (§ 30)
is not yet in the first edition, therefore it could easily happen that
this addition was inserted in the wrong place.

body of Samuel. So, as often as God gives His word, one must stay with
it; if He gives another word that departs from it, one must know how
Moses says that He tempts us \[Deut. 13:3\], as we see in the story of
Balaam. Therefore, this must be taken from the spiritual sacrifices and
grain offerings, as Paul teaches in the Epistle to the Romans Cap.
12, 1. \"Offer your bodies for sacrifice, living, holy, pleasing to
God.\"

**And will pledge to the Lord and keep.**

The vows of Christians are thanksgiving, praising and glorifying God,
not the vain antics of the vows of monastic life, which are in truth
worldly \[vows\]. However, the vows must be distinguished. Some are vows
of the Old Testament, which concerned temporal things, when either a
soul, that is our body, or a field, or cattle was vowed to the service
of the temple; just as with us are \"the servitudes\" which are for a
certain time. Moreover, there were also vows of death, as was the vow of
Jephthah. These are now abolished, after the service of the Old
Testament has ceased.

34\. The vows of the New Testament are only praise, glorify, thank,
confess to God 2c. And these are spiritual vows.

The third kind of vows are the civil ones, by which we bind ourselves
against the authorities. These we must keep, just like the other duties
required by the authorities. But the vows of the clergy are vain lies,
which are neither in our power nor can be kept.

\(36\) We should therefore be mindful that we must keep the vows, first,
so that we may kill ourselves, that Christ may be exalted and glorified
in His wisdom; then, so that we may recognize the benefits with which
God showers us and give thanks for them.

**V. 22. And the LORD will plague the Egyptians.**

37\. Christ will restrain and chasten his own through the cross;
otherwise they would be negligent. And note that chastening is for
health, not for destruction.

**284** u. xxn, i84-i8g. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 20, 1-4.
W. vi, 436-439. **285**

**V. 23. At that time there will be a railroad.**

This is a promise of the gospel, as I have said. There will be
Christians everywhere, both in Assyria and in Egypt, there will be one
faith 2c.

V. 24. 25. **At the same time Israel will be the third.**

39 This is a very clear text, that Israel will be made like the
Gentiles, and the Gentiles like the people of Israel.

**The twentieth chapter.**

1 The prophet prophesies against the Moors and Egyptians at the same
time, condemning the reliance on the covenants they had made among
themselves.

V. 1. 2. **Go and remove the sack from your loins.**

2.^n^ ) This passage serves to confirm our teaching that God has always
added signs to His words, either to confirm faith or to maintain the
fear of God, and not, as the Sacramentans err, so that they should be
outward signs of confession or marks of love. For these are rather
fruits of faith, and not signs. For the sacraments may well be accepted
by the false brethren; but the fruits of love no evil tree can bring
forth.

3 Therefore we say that the signs serve to increase faith and godliness
in the hearts. To be sure, we know that outward things do not bring
salvation if they are taken as outward things, that is, as things that
are ours. But God works salvation also through external things, and has
decreed that He will not give the Holy Spirit without a sign and without
an external thing. That is why He instituted in the Church the
Magisterium, Baptism and the Lord\'s Supper of the Body and Blood of His
Son. Thus, on the day of Pentecost, the Holy Spirit came down from
heaven and gave the

n\) Instead of §2-4, the edition of 1532 says: \"Behold, here is a sign
added to the word, not that it is a characteristic by which the
Egyptians and the Moors are recognized, but to strike fear into their
hearts. Thus the signs serve to either strengthen or frighten the minds,
and to provoke to the fear of God and to faith.

It was given to the apostles, not invisibly, but in a strong wind and in
the form of fiery tongues \[Acts 2:2, 3\].

\(4\) Therefore the sacramentarians err, and here apply a false
principle, saying, No outward thing is useful unto salvation. Rather,
turn it around and say: Without an outward thing one does not attain to
blessedness. For here is the clear text that an outward sign serves to
awaken the faith and fear of God. For the prophet wants to make the
Egyptians humble; and this does not belong to the signs of love or
confession, but to the power and effect of the Holy Spirit, who awakens
the hearts. For as the Holy Spirit moves by the word, so he also moves
by the signs, which are nothing else than, that I say so, the real
(real) word, since that is expressed by the thing which the sound of the
words gives to understand. And as the word is never in vain, so also the
signs cannot be without fruit. Thus baptism and the Lord\'s Supper are
signs by which faith is established and strengthened, but not by which
men are either provoked to love (although this should also happen) or
distinguished from one another as the marks of their confession.

**V. 3. 4. three years.**

5\. this sign shall be fulfilled within three years.

**Naked and barefoot.**

6\. to be clothed means to be powerful, to be rich. But to be clothed
with shoes means to be a

286 L. xxii, isü-188. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 439-443.
287

Reich, government, teachers, students have. All this he threatens to
take away.

**With sheer shame.**

7\. to uncover shame is to make shame, to take away all glory. But the
glory of a prince consists in the multitude of the people. Thus \"the
shame of Egypt\" is that it will have no people.

**V. 5 And they will stand with shame over the land of the Moors.**

\(8\) Hereby he punishes them for relying on the covenants they had made
among themselves. Thus, the Scriptures everywhere teach both fear and
faith. For God can tolerate everything, but He absolutely destroys
\[carnal\] trust.

Therefore he bears the sinners; but the righteous he abhors and
condemns. To the remnants of sin he looks through his fingers, but the
head of the serpent he crushes, so that the rnhm stands still \[Ps. 147,
11\]: \"The Lord is pleased with those who fear him.\" And this is
exactly what shines out of all his speeches, deeds and signs. Therefore,
we should learn to fear God and throw away all trust in our strength and
wisdom.

V. 6. **these islands.**

9 In Egypt and in the land of the Moors.

**How finely we escaped.**

10 These words mean the opposite (est ironia), as if to say: Our
covenants have not helped us.

**The twenty-first chapter.**

1\. he announces his burden to Babylon. For the prophet was very angry
with the Babylonians, because they would destroy the rest of the people
of Judah and the temple, which the Assyrians had never done.

**V. i. The desert by the sea.**

2\. this name is not to be taken as a description of the nature of the
land, but to be understood of the office and work, so that \"desert\"
must be taken in an *active* way, that it makes desolate oerter, like an
overflowing sea, that is, that the monarchy of the Babylonians devours
the world and the kingdoms.

**How a weather comes from noon.**

I will punish your cruelty with cruelty. But he points to the Persians
and Medes, through whom he wants to do this.

**V. 2: One despiser comes against another, one despised against
another.**

4 \[Instead of: Qui incredulus est etc.) translate: Contemptor contra
contemptorem, vastator

contra vastatorem venit, as if to say: You Babylon has long devastated
others: Cyrus will come and devastate you too.

**Elam.**

5\. are the Persians.

**I will put an end to all his sighing.**

6\. \"His\", namely Babylon\'s. Further understand \"the groaning\" as
above \[v. 1.\] \"the desolation\", that is, so that Babylon has made
other nations groan. He says: I will put a bit in its mouth, so that it
will not continue to frighten and torment others like this. Thus God
hears the sighing of the nations; how much more will He hear the cry of
His own!

**V. 3. For this reason my loins are full of pain.**

7 These are prophetic imitations. For he speaks in the person of the
Babylonians. But they complain mainly about the loins, in which the
power to beget children is. As if he wanted to say: There is neither
strength nor happiness, neither to increase the kingdom nor to keep it.

**288** xxn. 188-191- Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 21, 4-12. W.
VI, 443-446. **289**

**V. 4. I have no rest from it in the dear night.**

8 \[Instead of: Babylon dilecta mea posita est mihi in miraculum\]
translate: Dilecta nox posita est mihi in terrorem \[The dear night is
set to terrify me\], \"the dear night\".

**V. 5. Yes, prepare a table.**

9 This is a scornful speech. Babylon is conquered, just as Virgil says
of Troy. 1) Invadunt urbem somno vinoque sepultam.

\[So now the prophet ridicules this security; as if to say: Feast only
now in the greatest security; but the time will come when the
Babylonians will command their servants not to prepare a table, but to
seize the shield. Therefore, it would be more fitting to put out guards
instead of the feasting, to make ready the weapons for war instead of
the drinking.

**V. 6. Go, set a watchman.**

\(10\) To confirm the calamity he proclaimed, he adds the following as a
sign. As if to say: While you are feasting, behold, my servant, whom I
have appointed as a watchman, sees the enemies coming in chariots.

**V. 7: He sees horsemen riding and driving (Vidit currum duorum
equitum).**

11\. the singular is set \[in the Vulgate\] for the plural, that is, he
sees chariots and horses, that is, the advancing warriors.

**V. 8. And a lion cried out.**

12\. i consider this is to be taken from a guard.

**V. 9. Babel has fallen.**

13 All this is said for the comfort of Judah.

**V. 10. My dear threshing floor.**

14 It is doubtful whether it refers to Judah or to the Babylonians. But
ver-

1\) Vii-A. \^6v., lib II, V. 265.

I say of the Babylonians that they are God\'s threshing floor, which God
will tread down and destroy through the Medes and Persians, like the
grain on the threshing floor. For filius areae means what is on the
threshing floor, grain, seed 2c.

**V. 11. This is the burden over Duma: They call to me.**

15 This passage is obscure; some say that \"Duma\" is the name of a
city. But I think that Duma is the name of a country. For the name
stands Gen. 25, 14. among the sons of Ishmael, who gave their names not
to cities but to countries; just as from Kedar the Kedarenes, from
Nebajoth the Nabathaeans were named. I understand it in such a way that
the prophet speaks against a large part of the Ishmaelites, who live in
the stony Arabia. It is also uncertain what the calamity is that he
proclaims, whether they were devastated by the Babylonians or by the
Assyrians. It seems to me most likely that they were devastated by the
Jdumeans.

**One calls to me from Seir.**

16\. Seir and Idumea are one and the same. To me, Duma, comes this sad
voice from Seir. Guided by this suspicion, I believe that they \[the
Ishmaelites\] were devastated by the Idumeans.

**Guardian, is the night almost gone?**

17 That is, how much is left of the night? For these are sayings which
one imitates another, by which he indicates the fear of the besieged,
who hope for the day and for salvation. For they speak: How much is left
of the night until the day dawns again? That is, what end of our
distress do we have to hope for?

**V. 12. Though the morning comes, yet it will be night.**

\(18\) He hereby presents the guard as an answer to the despondent
citizens, making their pain even greater: \"Even if the day comes,
another night will follow, that is, there is no end to the distress. He

290 L. XXII, 191-19;. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 446-4S0.
291

thus indicates the utmost despair by this imitation. For the wicked are
wont to desire many things in danger, but to believe nothing.

**If you ask, you will come back and ask again.**

19\. translator Si quaeritis, quaeretis,^1^ ) revertimini et venietis
\[instead: Si quaeritis, quaerite, convertimini et venite in the
Vulgate\^. But I have said that it is spoken imitatively. For he
imitates the besieged as they speak, and describes how the heart of the
wicked stands in danger. As if to say, \"You cannot be raised up by any
comfort; though I tell you that it will be day, you will not be
satisfied with that, but will soon come back and ask about the same
thing again. Thus the wicked cannot be raised up, because in trouble
they have not the word on which they can safely rely. And all other
protection and help they have is uncertain; they cannot expect the day
without fear of the night. The godly, however, expect the day in danger,
without fear of the night, because they hear the word of God in the
night.

1\) In the Wittenberg incorrect: 8i quasrötis, qu\^eriti\".

At night they keep the word, they are satisfied with it, and do not ask
again.

**V. 13. This is the burden over Arabia.**

20 Here he prophesies against another son \[of Ishmael, Kedar, Gen. 25,
13. But Kedar is a famous family among the Ishmaelites.

**You will live in the forest in Arabia.**

21 That is, the army of the enemy will be so great that at the mere
rumor of it you will turn out, abandon everything, and flee into the
deserts.

22 \"Dedanim\", they say, is a city in Arabia, but it is unknown to me.

**V. 14-17. Bring water to the thirsty.**

This is a mocking speech: Dear neighbors, give water to the wretched
people, who are already exhausted by the flight, so that they can
refresh themselves.

**You who dwell in the land of Theme.**

24 \[In the Vulgate: Qui habitatis terram austri\] In Hebrew: Who
inhabits their subject, which is so called by a son of Ishmael. I do not
think that Oecolampadius has explained this passage correctly.

**The twenty-second chapter.**

Here he himself prophesies misfortune to Jerusalem, and especially to
its court master, Zebna \[v. 15\]. But it is doubtful what this
misfortune was. I think that it was the first Babylonian captivity under
Jehoiakim, because at that time only the most distinguished were led
into Babylonia.

But he calls Jerusalem a \"valley of showers\" because it had many
prophets who were called \"showers\". The name \"valley\" also contains
a secret punishment in it; as if it wanted to say: You Jerusalem, which
was a very famous mountain until now, when the fear of God blossomed in
you, will be humbled and made from a mountain to a valley.

**V. 1. 2. What is the matter with all of you, that you are all so lazy
on the housetops?**

3\. either out of fear of the enemies, that you want to hide yourself,
or that you want to defend yourself against the enemies. But here one
must reverse the construction: You city, which would be full of sound, a
city full of people, a joyful city (namely, until now, at the time of
peace), what is the matter with you? 2c.

**Your slain are not slain with the sword.**

4 For they perished by famine and pestilence. For they kept within the
ramparts of the city, and delivered unto the enemy

**292** L. xxn, 193-195. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 22, 2-19.
W. VI, 450-454. **293**

no meeting, as is clear from the prophet Jeremiah Cap. 39 is clear. But
the following words:

**V. 3. but all your captains 2c.**

are proof that he is talking about the first captivity, when the best
part of the people was taken away.

**V. 4. Lift yourselves up from me, let me weep bitterly.**

5 The prophet here introduces the sorrow (affectum) of the weeping and
mourning people, over the defeat suffered by Nebuchadnezzar.

**V. 5. from the Lord.**

\(6\) He adds this to call his own to repentance and to deprive the
Babylonians of the glory of victory.

**For the sake of undermining the walls.**

7\. that is why it is \"a day of tumult and destruction\", because the
wall is undermined and the enemies are close to the mountain. For the
Assyrians had decided they would destroy besieged Jerusalem if it did
not surrender.

**V. 6. 7. Kir therefore shines with shields.**

8 \[Instead of: Parietem nudavit clypeus in the Vulgate\] translate: Et
Kir nudavit clypeum^1^ ) \[and Kir has bared the shield\]. \"Kir\" we
have already had above \[Cap. 16, § 4\]. But it seems that it was one of
the most famous cities of the Assyrians.

**V. 8. Then the veil of Judah will be uncovered.**

\(9\) What they have of hidden riches will be brought to light and taken
away from the enemies.

**The house of the forest.**

10\) Because a lot of wood was brought together for this building.
Furthermore, it was the very house in which the golden utensils were
kept, as can be seen from the books of Chronicles. \[2 Chron. 4, 19. 9,
3. 2 Kings 20, 13. 2 Chron. 32, 24Z

1\) In all editions: Xir uuäavit paristsin. Instead of pai-istsm we have
put, as it obviously (cf., Cap. 16, 84) must read.

**V. 9. 10. You will also count the houses of Jerusalem.**

\(11\) That is, you will set up an assessment, you will demand money
from house to house, because you have been put into extreme poverty by
the enemy.

**And you will have to collect the water in the lower pond.**

12 \[Instead of congregastis\] read the future tense. But it indicates
the lack of water.

**V. 11. You do not yet look at the one who does this.**

13\. God does this, but you do not think that you deserve such
misfortune. This is what all the wicked do; they interpret the
punishment as a cross and an undeserved suffering for the sake of God\'s
name.

**V. 12. Therefore the LORD of hosts will call at that time.**

14\. there will be prophets around this time of tribulation who will
convince you to repent, but they will do nothing.

**V. 13. 14. Let us eat and drink.**

\(15\) These are the words of the scornful, and of those who mock the
prophet, and despise the judgment of God. Well, he proclaims evil to us,
but let us feast and feast before we have to suffer this evil. As if
they wanted to say: Nothing will come of all this. Furthermore, eating
and drinking wine 2c. is not evil; but these are evil works, eating and
drinking in contempt of God and his word.

**V. 15-19 What do you have here?**

\(16\) This \[Zebna\] was the most distinguished man in the court, and,
as is evident from this, a great hypocrite, whom no one could judge but
Isaiah. He accused him, not because he was an adulterer, or a thief, or
a murderer, but because he so surely despised this proclamation of
Isaiah of the coming calamity. This then gave others cause to despise
the word. Therefore, it is easy to fall from the faith, because we see
that such great men have fallen who have never made a mistake in their
walk.

294 L xxn, i9s-i98. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 454-457. 295

This is how Moses, Aaron, Peter and others fell. Therefore, such
examples should entertain in us the fear of God, that we may not be safe
or presumptuous. For as long as we live, even among the saints, there
always remains something of the flesh. Furthermore, it is to be noted
that here again the order is not observed.

**There your delicious chariots will remain.**

17\. He punishes the trust of this Sebna on his great fortune and
honorary offices.

**Behold, the Lord.**

\(18\) Translate thus, Behold, the LORD shall cast thee away, as a
strong man casteth one away, and he shall shut thee up. And shall
compass thee about, as a ball upon a broad land.\" That is, after you
are thrown away and arrive in Babylon, you will be thrown up and down
like a bullet. You will have no rest either in your body or in your
heart. But one must remember the excellent image that the conscience, if
it does not have the word of God, is like a ball that is being driven
around outside the earth and cannot rest. Furthermore, this is also said
to the horror of those whom this Sebna gave cause to despise the word.

**The house of your masters.**

19 Here he touches on another sin, namely, trusting in men, over which
he must become ashamed. Here one must guess who these masters were. It
seems that he \[Zebna\] was still alive after Hezekiah under Manasseh,
who was also led away captive.

**V. 20. 21. And at that time I will call to my servant Eliakim.**

\(20\) It is probable that Eliakim and Zebna were adversaries, because
the former despised the word, and the latter honored and believed it.

**V. 22. And will put the keys of the house of David on his shoulder.**

21 This he speaks according to the usage of that people. Because they
hung the keys on the shoulders. But it means that he should become royal
treasurer\....

**That he may rise, and no one may join.**

I take it in the simple sense for the description of his office and its
administration. He will be the rentmaster, who will have the supervision
of all income, to whom all boxes and doors will be open.

**V. 23. And will put him to the nail in a strong place.**

23 This refers to the contrast: You will be thrown away, but he will be
put in a fixed place as a nail. This is an excellent praise of a good
and godly authority, that it is pleasing to God, that God protects it
and puts it in a fixed place, like a nail, so that it cannot be moved,
on which nail all the utensils of the house are supported. For the whole
community rests on a good prince.

**And shall have the chair of honor in his father\'s house.**

24\. for this honor falls back on the parents.

**V. 24. That all the glory of his Father\'s house might be hanged on
him.**

25\. I will hang all the servants on this man, that is, he will rule the
whole state. For these are figurative words. The \"little vessels\" mean
the poor. The \"drinking vessels\" are the necessary trades in the
commonwealth, as, butchers, bakers 2c. \"All kinds of string play\" are
the trades that belong to the amenity (ad ornatum), as, the merchants
2c. Furthermore, this is a great blessing when God gives both a hearing
ear and a seeing eye \[Proverbs 20:12\], that is, a good and wise
authority, then obedient subjects.

**V. 25: In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, shall the nail be taken
away.**

26 It is a divine blessing to have good authorities. But it will come to
pass, he says, because of the sin of the people, that the LORD will take
away both the nail and the obedient subjects. For I suppose that this
was not said by Zebna, but by Eliakim under Josiah.

**396** r98-2 \"o. Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 23, 1-9. w. vi,
437-400. **297**

**The twenty-third chapter.**

So far the prophet has announced to Jerusalem and almost all neighboring
nations their impending disaster. Now Tyre and Zidon are left, of which
he speaks in this chapter. Because Tyre was conquered and destroyed
twice, first by Nebuchadnezzar, as it is written in Ezek. 26, 7, and
then by Alexander, I believe that the prophet is speaking here of the
last conquest, which was made by Alexander.

**V. 1. Hail, ye ships of the sea.**

2\. naves tarsis sea ships. For Tyre lay by the sea, and was famous for
its commerce.

**From the land of Chitim.**

It seems that the Jews named not only Macedonia but all Europe with this
naive \[Chitim\]. But the name agrees with the name Macedonia, in which
Alexander ruled. And this passage makes that I take this chapter not
from Nebucadnezzar, but from Alexander.

**V. 2. The inhabitants of the islands have become silent.**

4\. mas in the Vulgate reads: Tacete; qui habitatis in insula\],
translate: \"The inhabitants of the islands have become silent\", that
is, have been destroyed and annihilated. For the silence in a city
indicates that the city is devastated, where there should be a lot of
people.

**The merchants of Zidon.**

\(5\) From midnight the Zidonians, and from noon the Egyptians, carried
their merchandise to Tyre.

**V. 3: And the fruit that grew by the Sihor, and the corn that grew by
the waters, were brought in unto it by great waters.**

\(6\) That is, all that grows along the Nile, and all that is in Egypt
of grain and wine, the

is entirely yours. For it is fed to you on the sea. Thus he describes
the rich and therefore spoiled and presumptuous city by its splendor.

V. 4. **the sea, even the stronghold by the sea.**

7 He calls it Tyre because it was the most powerful on the sea.

**I no longer give birth.**

I am barren, I am deprived of my citizens, and devastated. He also
threatens Zidon with such devastation.

**V. 5-7. Is this your joyful city?**

He mocks the proud confidence of this very powerful city, which could be
conquered only by great rulers (monarchs). Therefore, it was sure and
did not believe this prophecy until it actually learned it.

**V. 8. 9. Who would have thought that this would happen to Tyre, the
crown?**

\(9\) As if to say, No eye sees this now, no ear hears what is to come
upon Tyre; and there is no one who can either foresee or believe what is
to come upon her. The cause is, because the hearts are prevented by this
dazzle, namely their power and riches. That is why they will perish
suddenly, while they will not be provided with anything less.

10 Thus, when we threaten our princes and the whole of Germany with the
imminent fall, no one believes us, but we are ridiculed and punished
with all imaginable punishments. Therefore, this passage comforts us
that, just as this threat of the prophet against Tyre was not in vain,
so also the tyranny of our enemies will one day come to an end. So
neither the pope believes that he can fall, nor the Turk either; but
they will both fall, just as Tyre fell.

298 uii, 200-202. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, ino-uu. 293

**Tyre, the crown.**

This is the reason why this prophecy is not believed. Because the
prophecy of Isaiah, and the crowned Tyre just argue against each other.
Therefore, neither this sTyrus\] can be believed, nor that \[prophecy\]
believed, but only the poor of the land believe both the promises and
the threats of God. For this is the way of the Word of God, that it
presents to us things that are beyond our understanding. Thus, when it
promises forgiveness of sins, it promises impossible things that one
cannot think of and that one despairs of. Therefore, faith cannot be
based on anything else but the word; if it abandons the word and thinks
that the matter is inconsistent, it immediately falls and is lost.
Isaiah threatens that Tyre will fall. Now, if you let go of the word and
look at the city that was so fortified by wealth and power, it seems
that nothing less will happen; indeed, you think that Isaiah is
nonsensical for predicting such inconsistent things; and yet the outcome
is as the word says.

It is the same with the promises of God, which, considering the present
distress, are also impossible, as we see in Jerusalem, when it was
besieged by the Assyrians. Thus the Word always prescribes such things
to us that are contrary to the present. This is the power and nature of
faith, that it holds to the word against the sensation of things
present, and believes, no matter how tasteless, inconsistent, and
unthinkable. Thus in lowliness one must have hope of exaltation, in sin
hope of righteousness, in wrath hope of grace 2c. Thus such histories
serve to increase faith and fear.

**V. 10. Go through your land like a river.**

\(13\) This is an excellent image by which he indicates the future
dispersion. Just as a river runs swiftly and leaves everything behind,
so you will leave your homes and your city when you are driven away.

**There is no more belt.**

14\. he calls the worldly regiment, the kingdom, a \"belt\", as Job 1)
12, 18. says: \"He loosens the kings belt.\"

**V. 11. He stretches out his hand over the sea.**

\(15\) This is how the prophet wants to inspire faith in himself. As if
he wanted to say: These are by no means vain things that I proclaim,
although you, Tyre, who are puffed up with confidence in your strength
and wealth, think that these are impossible things. For he who has
conquered Pharaoh and Egypt, as well as the land of Canaan, will also
subdue you.

**V. 12. You daughter Zidon. O Chitim, arise and depart (Filia Sidonis
in Chitim).**

016 This is, Zidon, which thou art laid waste by the Macedonians.

**V. 13. 14. But in the land of the Chaldeans.**

\(17\) This is a dark saying; if it is taken in an active way, it is to
be understood of the Chaldean devastation. But I take it in a passive
way, that the opinion is this: You will not be able to resist Alexander,
he will conquer you. For he will also destroy Babylon, where there is
not yet a nation (that is, where there is not yet a monarchy). It can be
given the words according to the Hebrew approximately thus: Behold, the
land of the Chaldeans, wherein is not yet a nation; Assyria hath
prepared this \[land\] to ship there, and hath set up towers and built
palaces: yet is it set to destruction.

**V. 15-17. At that time.**

\(18\) The number of years agrees with the years of the Babylonian
captivity, but we take it from the Macedonians. But he says that it
shall come to pass that Tyre shall be rebuilt, and shall flourish again
after seventy years, and shall be celebrated in writings. For this he
indicates by the word \"harp\".

19\. he calls her a harlot because of idolatry, which she herself a very
honorable matron.

1\) Erlanger: 12.\" instead of: 12.

**WO** k. xxn, 202-204. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 24, 1-5. W.
VI, 464-467. **301**

that is, a God-fearing and worshipful commonwealth. But the Holy Spirit
judges differently, and calls her a whore.

**V. 18. But their buying trade.**

20\. I understand it of the future kingdom of Christ, that Tyre itself
also shall be converted unto the Lord. Therefore he says: After they
have resumed their former trading

The kingdom of Christ will be near, which Tyre will also accept; as
Lucas testifies in Acts Cap. 21, 3. ff.

**That they eat and become full.**

\(21\) They will not misuse wealth for splendor and indulgence, as
before, but for need and benefit. They will entertain the saints and
assist them. This is great praise for Tyre.

**The twenty-fourth chapter.**

After the prophet has gone through the neighboring nations and peoples,
he finally comes back to his people. And here arises the question, of
what kind of desolation he speaks? Some take it generally of the last
judgment, that it is, as it were, a resolution of the particular threat
which he has hitherto treated. But I think he is talking about the
desolation that is to take place at the time of the faithful Tyre, that
is, the desolation of the synagogue and its people, of which Christ
speaks Matth. 24, 15.

**V. 1. Behold, the LORD makes the land empty and desolate.**

In another place he calls the synagogue a vineyard whose wall is torn
down because God withdraws his protection and blessing from it. For
after the prophets, Christ, and the apostles, along with the rest of the
saints, were taken away from it, the entrance to it was open to the
Roman beasts.

V. 2: **And go to the priest as to the people.**

As long as the land of the Jews still existed, their commonwealth was
very well established and ordered; but when the Romans come, there will
no longer be any difference either among the offices or among the
estates. Therefore, both the priesthood and the kingdom must necessarily
fall. For neither the

Religions nor communities exist unless the offices and persons are
distinguished from each other in a certain order.

V. 3 **For the Lord has spoken these things.**

4 He adds this restriction against the presumption of the Jews, who
surely despised these threats because their city was both holy and well
fortified. The Lord has spoken these things,\" he says, \"and they will
necessarily come to pass.

V. 4: The **land stands miserable and ruined (defluxit terra).**

The land\" means the Jewish land that was inhabited by the Jews. The
word defluere actually means \"to wither,\" to indicate that the
synagogue will never return to its former state, just as a leaf that
withers never becomes green again.

**The highest of the people in the country are decreasing.**

\(6\) He says expressly, \"the highest,\" to indicate that the rest
shall be saved. For he distinguishes the high from the low, therefore it
cannot be understood of the last day.

V. 5 The **land is desecrated.**

So far he has talked about the punishment, now he talks about the guilt
and says that it was threefold. Firstly, that it was \"the

302 L. XXII, 204-207. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 467-471.
303

They had \"profaned the land\" through their hypocrisy and zeal, which
came from ignorance. Secondly, that they had \"sinned against the law\"
by works that were obviously contrary to it, and that they had perverted
it, as is written in the fifth chapter of Matthew, v. 20 ff. Third, that
they did not believe the promises of Christ, nor accept him when he came
2c. For this is called \"letting go of the everlasting covenant.\" And
this last part convinces us that the prophet\'s words are to be
understood only of the desolation of the Gentiles. For the Gentiles had
no covenant with God, because one wanted to understand the law of nature
by it. But this is too forced. Furthermore, notice that these sins are
more with the teachers than with the people. For they are the ones who
change the law and let the law go. But these are still small sins, by
which the commandments of the moral law are transgressed, compared with
those sins by which the promises of Christ and the word of the gospel
are rejected.

V. 6. **Therefore the curse devours the land.**

8 The prophet looks herewith at the curses Deut. 28, 15. ff. The
description of it is rich in words and adorned with pictures.

V. 7-11. **People lament wine in the streets.**

9 He calls the grief of those who complain that the city is desolate and
empty, and that there is no one left to sell wine or other things
necessary for living.

**V. 12: The gates are desolate.**

10\. there is no council meeting, no court of law there, no courts are
held there.

**V. 13. 14. for it is going on in the land and among the people 2c.**

\(11\) Translate this passage thus: \"For it is the same in the land and
among the people, as when an olive tree is plucked up; as when the wine
harvest is over. But this is a figurative speech. \"The vineyard\" is
the land of Judea; the grapes are both the

The nobles are the mob; the grape pickers are the Romans. Just as when
the grapes are gathered, some remain because of the carelessness of the
grape pickers, so Judea will be devastated, but there will still be some
remnant who will be saved and gathered into the church of the faithful.
These remnant are the apostles. \"They shall lift up their voice,\" that
is, they shall preach the gospel, and extol the mercy and grace of
Christ, and \"shout for the glory of the Lord,\" not for their works or
the righteousness of the law. \"But the glory of the LORD\" is the
victory of Christ, by which he has become a LORD over all, and has
trodden the devil, sin, death, and the world under his feet, as Paul
treats this passage in the Epistle to the Colossians Cap. 2, 13. ff.

This \"shouting\" will be heard, not in the corners of the Jewish land,
but \"from the sea\"; that is, it will be spread everywhere among the
Gentiles, and go through the whole world. He understands the
Mediterranean Sea, which Paul sailed through, as it is written in the
Acts of the Apostles.

**V. 15. Travel now to the Lord in doctrinis.**

This means that the gospel will bear much fruit and will not be preached
in vain, for the Gentiles will believe and praise God. Furthermore, what
the Latin translator has given: In doctrinis, that must be translated in
vallibus \[in the reasons\].

**V. 16. We hear songs of praise from the end of the earth.**

14 This is a lament by which he weeps for the unbelief of his people.
The Gentiles eagerly receive Christ, believe in him and rejoice, \"but I
am so very meager\", that is, few of the Jews accept this Christ, the
majority despise and hate him, as John says \[Cap. 1, 11\]: \"He came
into his own, but his own did not receive him\" 2c.

15\. further, that he says, \"from the end of the earth,\" meaning the
power and course of the

**304** xxn, M7-209. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 24, 16-21. W.
vi, 471-474. **305**

Evangelii. Until now it was common that the hymns were sung in the
temple alone; now the song of the glory of the righteous is heard from
the sea. The Latin translator has erred in translating: Secretum meum
milii. For the word means leanness, not a secret. As if he wanted to
say: I am meager; there are few of my people who grasp this justice.

**In honor of the righteous (gloriam justi).**

16 The word gloria means sweetness, pleasantness. For he means to say
that they sing of the most lovely righteousness, which has never been
heard of before in the world, namely, that our sins are forgiven, that
the world, death, hell, and Satan are trodden down without our powers,
and that this victory is given to us without our merit; for I take the
singular for the plural; \"in honor of the righteous,\" that is, of the
righteous, both that Christ is righteous and that Christians are
righteous through him. This will be the most lovely and pleasant song,
that all this is given to us by grace and for free.

**Woe is me! for the despisers despise.**

\(17\) They not only despise the gospel, but they also despise it with
great certainty, and boast about it, as the papists do today.

V. 17. 18. **Therefore terror, pit and ropes come upon you inhabitants
of the land.**

18\. \"Fear\" is that they fear, since there is nothing to fear. For
ungodly doctrine makes the heart uneasy. \"Rope\" and \"pit\" can be
related either to doctrine or to misfortune, that they fall from one
error into another, from one misfortune into another.

**For the windows in the height are aufgethan.**

19th cause because the floods of wrath have overtaken them. But this
text actually belongs to our papists. For the same punishment must
necessarily come upon them, because they are in the same sin and do not
repent at all.

**V. 19: The land will be evil, and nothing will succeed, and it will
fall apart.**

20 These are terrifying threats, that the synagogue and all the wicked
will be plagued with perpetual misfortune, seeking vain attempts and
means, which will not only be futile and in vain, but will also give
rise to greater and more severe dangers and misfortunes. So that this
change will last constantly, that misfortune will be followed by futile
attempts, that attempts will be followed by new cases, \"that there will
be no more strength, help, 1) nor luck.

**V. 20. The land will reel like a drunkard.**

21\. it will not be able to resist the calamity; there will be no peace,
no safe seat. That is how the Jews are still going astray today.

**V. 21. At that time the Lord will visit the high knighthood (militiam
coeli).**

22 This passage has been explained in many ways; most understand it by
the devils. I leave others their opinion, but do not depart from what it
is about here, namely the desolation of the synagogue. For \"the high
knighthood\" and \"the kings of the earth\" he calls the Jewish people,
who alone had the service of GOD, and fought for GOD. Accordingly, he
threatens that the time will come when the high knighthood and the kings
of the earth, that is, the priesthood and the worldly regiment, which
were appointed by God, will finally perish. But he uses these
magnificent names, \"high knighthood\" and \"kings of the earth\", to
punish the presumption and arrogance of the Jewish people, who were
puffed up by the opinion that they were righteous and had the true
service of God, and despised all the threats of the prophets. For they,
having the name that they were the high knighthood, did not want to be
punished, nor to suffer anything, as we see today with the papists, who
boast that they are the church and have the fathers for themselves.

1\) Wittenberger: \"Das kein stercke helffe.\"

306 L. xxn, MS-2H. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 474-478. 307

**V. 22: That they may be gathered together in a little tree.**

\(23\) The saying is ambiguous, and can be taken both from the dead and
from the living. I would rather understand it of the dead, that the
opinion is this: All will be gathered together as in a bundle, and will
be kept for the future judgment, where he will punish and judge the
wickedness of all at the same time. For this reason he adds, \"After a
long time.\" When it is taken from the living, the opinion will be this,
that the Jews today will be gathered into one bundle, that is, into one
and the same faithlessness and unbelief, and will be kept for judgment
2c.

**V. 23. And the moon will be ashamed.**

\(24\) When Christ shall reign through the preaching of the apostles
(for these are \"the elders\"), then both the sun and the moon shall be
darkened unto the ungodly remnant of the Jews, that is, they shall be in
so much gloom and sadness, pain and anguish, that they shall not be able
to see.

that even this light of heaven will be unpleasant to them. For this is
how it is with distressed souls: everything that comes before them seems
to them to be sad and distressed. This attitude (affectum) of a sad and
in many ways troubled mind is described here by the prophet.

\(25\) Now this is an excellent passage, which testifies that God does
not suffer presumption. For even though the worship of this people was
instituted by God Himself, and all of their deeds were divine deeds,
they still acted because they were therefore hopeful, and thought that
they were therefore safe from all danger. So also today the papacy, with
its so great crimes and manifest sins, nevertheless believes that it
will also be safe from God under the name of the church. Therefore they
lose the matter and keep only the empty name. 1)

1\) In the Latin editions, the remark to v. 2 of the following chapter
was inserted by mistake. Like the old translator, we put it in the
correct place.

**The twenty-fifth chapter.**

The content is the same as that of the previous chapter, except that
here he describes the devastation in different words and with different
images. He begins with thanksgiving in the person of those who are left
from the devastation.

**V. i. Your taking from the old (cogitationes antiquas).**

\(2\) \"Miracles\" and \"foreknowledge\" are the promises and prophecies
that happened to the fathers of the future kingdom of Christ and of
redemption from death and sin.

Therefore, he rejoices that they have been so abundantly filled through
Christ, after the gospel has been preached and the Holy Spirit has been
given.

is that we now know where the heart should look and what it should
believe.

**V. 2. for you make the city a heap of stones (Quia posuisti civitatem
in tumultum).**

3 This is the other part of the thanksgiving, because of the damage done
\[to the obdurate Jerusalem. There seems to have been an oversight here
on the part of the scribe \[in the Vulgate\] in that he wrote tumultum
for the word cumulum. For it must be given thus: Posuisti civitatem in
cumulum seu acervum lapidum, \"for you make the city a heap of stones.\"

**The solid city.**

4 Thus he calls Jerusalem because of the presumption on the temple, on
the law, and on the service of God.

308 **u. xxu, 2H-2I4.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 25, 2-4.
**W. vi, 478-481.** 309

**The Strangers Palace.**

5 He calls them \"strangers\" because of unbelief. Thus Pliny says, lib.
5, cap. 14, Jerusalem was the most famous of all the cities in the
Orient. The Jews must be very blinded and stubborn who do not heed such
a clear text.

V. 3. **Therefore honor you.**

\(6\) Hitherto a small and stiff-necked people worshipped thee in the
corner of the land of Judah; in their place thou shalt have a great and
mighty people, all the Gentiles who honor thee.

7 And this passage must be noted, because it clearly says that the
worship of the New Testament does not consist in sacrifices, not in the
edification of churches, not in masses, but in the praise and fear of
God, because among the Gentiles the sacrifice of praise will be offered,
and God will be feared, so that hypocrisy is excluded. For the fear of
God is the right worship of God, and does not stand in garments or other
outward splendor, but depends on the heart.

**For thou art the strength of the lowly, the strength of the poor in
tribulation**.

8.^o^ ) He calls the people \[v. 3.\] \"a mighty nation\" in regard to
the number and the multitude of them; but in regard to their
disposition, and their heart, and their position in life (fortunam),
they are \"few\".

\(9\) Now this is a lovely description of Christ, what kind of God He is
and what kind of people or kingdom He has, as He describes Himself,
Matt. 11:28: \"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. That his kingdom is a kingdom for the poor, who
are to be comforted, for the afflicted and the despised in the world,
whom the world calls heretics and puts under ban, who, because they are
burdened with the hatred of the world, also feel sin and an evil
conscience. About such

o\) Instead of §§8-12, the 1532 edition brings only the following:
\"Come to me, all you who labor\"; \"He has sent me to preach the gospel
to the poor\" 2c., are excellent consolations.

Christ is a king of people, as he says elsewhere (Luc. 4, 18.\]: \"He
sent me to preach the gospel to the poor.\" He is a king of the poor, to
whom the poor and the weary can approach with confidence, because he
says that he alone is their king. On the other hand, those who are
powerful, rich, holy, and unaware of sin, this poor king is frightening
to such people, as he says in Ps. 2:10 ff: \"Let yourselves therefore be
instructed, O kings\" 2c.

**A refuge from the storm, a shade from the heat.**

\(10\) You are the confidence of those who are tossed to and fro by
storms and tempests, that is, who suffer persecution for the sake of the
Word of God, who are pressed by sin and their own flesh and Satan. In
all this danger we have no other refuge than Christ. If we run to Him,
we have a sure refuge against all attacks of all evils. Thus he says
Matth. 7, 24. 25. full of the wise man who builds his house on a rock.

**When the tyrants rage (spiritus enim robustorum).**

This must be connected with the next preceding words: \"You are a refuge
from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the spirit (that is, the
raging) of the tyrants (add: \"breaks in\" or \"rages against them\"),
like a storm against a wall. This is an apt image. In the tribulation
and thunderstorm we cannot judge that help and salvation are so near.
For we judge according to the sensation that is set in sadness and
unrest by the present trouble, and does not see the future salvation.
Here, indeed, we feel that we are a weak fence that cannot withstand the
raging torrent that rushes in with impetuosity. Thus, this image
presents the condition of a Christian and believer who is in
tribulation.

12\. so I am, as it were, a weak fence, which is set against the pope
and the emperor, who are, as it were, the riverbed of the elbe.

**310 L. XXII, 214-216. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 481-483.
311**

These would sweep us away in an instant if Christ allowed them to. For
they are a hundred times stronger and more powerful than we are. They
know this, and that is why they rely on their power, strength and
attacks against us. Christians, on the other hand, know that they are
powerless. How is it, then, that they can do nothing, and harm neither
with their power, nor with their strength, nor with their attacks, since
they alone urge and desire it? Certainly, if you consult reason, it will
soon despair and say that he who is superior in strength and power will
have the upper hand. But Isaiah says the opposite, namely, that the poor
man has an insurmountable strength beside him and a safe refuge against
all storms, because he looks with certain faith to Christ and says: You
are my strength. This confidence then overcomes all the power and
authority of the world and Satan. Therefore, one must learn that
salvation and help are closest when they seem to be farthest away.

V. 5. sicut aestus in siti. ^p^)

13 Translate thus: \"You humble the stranger\'s impetuosity, like the
heat in an arid place. The heat in the shadow of the cloud will spoil
the vine of the tyrants.\" He calls \"shadow of the cloud\" (umbram
nubis) what we call in German \"Mehlthau\", namely the harmful dew that
falls during the day, by which the seeds are burned, and the leaves on
trees and vines wither and perish. He thus implies that the tyrants
would perish by themselves. Thus the synagogue and the whole Jewish
people, thus the rule of the Romans has been eradicated. But the church
overcame through suffering, and continues to this day; not that she took
up arms against her persecutors, but she allowed herself to be killed,
and through her destruction she overcame.

14\. since god stopped the adversaries

p\) These words are interpreted in the 1532 edition like this: The
Christep will conquer, not by resisting, but by suffering. For he says
that the Lord himself will dry them up. This drying up happens when he
ceases to bless. - Then follows 16.

and took away from them the people who were sent to administer the
commonwealths (for when these are gone, the kingdoms must necessarily
fall, however powerful they may be), it means that the tyrants will be
dried up by the heat, if he does not give fertile rain, but the shadow
of the cloud, \"a harmful flour dew\". This is how Italy and Hungary
have been spoiled in our time, and it seems that Germany will be the
same. And no community has ever perished through lack of goods or
forces, but through lack of wise men and lack of fertile rain. And
Christians overcome by commanding the matter to him who judges rightly.

15 But it is emphatically said that he calls them a vine of the strong
(palmitem fortium), because they blossom in such a way that they give
the greatest hope of future fruit. But what happens? When they are least
careful of all, they perish by heat and flour. For the wicked their
plots fail; because they are very sure and bloodthirsty, they do not
bring their days to the half \[Ps. 55:24\]. Thus we see now that our
adversaries flourish, and make the certain hope that they will destroy
us; but it shall come to pass that they themselves shall perish, but we
shall remain. God will drop a dusting of flour into their vineyards. So
this is our comfort, that they will not get where they are thinking with
their plots; indeed, they will not even reach half of their thoughts,
but will perish in the midst of their plots. The text will not deceive
us. The same will happen to the Turk and all the enemies of the Church
of Christ.

**V. 6 And the LORD of hosts shall make a fat banquet in this mountain
for all the people.**

16\) Of the slaughter of the wicked he says, \"The LORD will make a
feast in this mountain,\" that is, he will gather all the people to
Jerusalem; there he will cause them to be slaughtered by the Romans.
\"The fat\" are the rich; for the marrow signifies all that is very
tender. Thus \"the marrow of the wheat\" means as much as the best
wheat.

312 **L. xxil, 216-218.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 25, 6-9.
w. **vi, 484-487.** 31Z

**From wine in which there is no yeast.**

17 \[Instead of Vindemiae defaecatae in the Vulgate\] translate: faecium
expressarum \[of pressed out yeasts\], that is, he will thus destroy
them, so that not even the yeasts will remain.

**V. 7. 8. and he will put away the covering on this mountain (Et
devorabitur in monte isto facies singulorum involutorum).**

18\. so translate instead of: Et praecipitabit \[etc, in the Vulgate\].

19 That is, he will destroy the covering with which all are covered. But
he calls \"the covering\" (faciem involutorum) death and sin, with which
all men are covered. For death is, as it were, a covering before God,
with which the whole world is covered. This covering will be taken away
by the godly on Mount Zion, that is, in the Church. For this is the
fruit and effect of the gospel, that it quickeneth the dead, and taketh
away death. Thus says the prophet: \"The godless Jews will be slain, but
the faithful will be preserved, though they are covered with many evils.

20\. for Christ has overcome death, that it has no right over believers.
Thus he says in Hosea Cap. 13, 14: \"Death, I will be thy death; hell, I
will be thy pestilence.\" For with Christians there is a continual
devouring of death, and the kingdom of Christ is nothing other than a
continual devouring of death and hell. For just as the pestilence is
continually devouring the powers of the body, so Christ is continually
devouring death and sin in His own. But this happens when we believe the
word. For as much as the knowledge of the word and of Christ increases,
so much life increases; but as life increases, so death and sin
decrease.

21 But he expressly adds that it takes place \"on this mountain\", that
is, in the church and in this bodily life. For justification and eternal
life begins in this life and is completed after the death of this flesh.
Thus Paul says \[Rom. 8, 24.\]: \"We are blessed, but in hope,\" but he
calls it an outward

Appearance (kaeiom) to indicate that it will be easy for him to destroy
death.

**And the Lord will wipe away the tears from all faces.**

\(22\) Christians are afflicted with endless tribulations, which are as
it were covers with which death wraps us, and so that it keeps us. But
he says, \"The Lord will remove these covers.

**And will lift up the reproach of his people.**

23\. for there is nothing more despised than Christians. For they are
always as a curse of the world, and a sweep-offering of all men, as Paul
says \[1 Cor. 4:13.\],^q^ ) and the world believes that by them heaven
and earth are defiled and stained; but if they were taken out of the
way, they would be cleansed and atoned for. For this is the meaning of
the Greek word \\χα&άρματά\\*.* Thus Christ says

Ps. 22:7: \"I am a worm and not a man.\" This is therefore the name of a
Christian, let him suffer this outwardly from men, or inwardly from the
devil and his conscience. Where these covers are not there, namely
death, sin and shame, the ministry of Christ will be in vain. This,
therefore, is an excellent description of Christ, that he is such a
king, who swallows up sins, death, imprisonment, and shame, and whatever
other such covers there are.

**V. 9. At that time it will be said, \"Behold, this is our God.**

This is the glory of the Christians and the only worship of the New
Testament, which he distinguishes from the old worship, which consisted
of many sacrifices. But the worship of the New Testament is believing,
trusting, hoping in God for the sake of Christ and through Him. Now
these words are of great emphasis. For no one believes but he who is in
the cross and tribulation. And these alone bring the sacrifice of praise
to God, now that they are freed from distress and feel the benefits of
God.

From here to the end of the paragraph, the 1532 edition has only the
words: This covering Christ will also take away.

314 k. XXII, 218-221. interpretations On the prophets. W. VI, 487-4SI.
315

**V. 10. The hand of the Lord rests on this mountain.**

The power and authority of God will remain with the church because He
saves it and makes it joyful. But at the time when she is in
tribulation, the opposite is in view. For it seems as if she is
oppressed by the hand of the devil.

**But Moab will be crushed under him.**

26\. this is an interchange of words (metonymia,). \"Moab\" is set for
the un

believing synagogue that does not convert. This will be \"crushed,\"
that is, it will be the most despised, it will be trampled underfoot all
over the world.

**V. 11. 13. And he will spread out his hands in the midst of them.**

\(27\) As a swimmer presses the waters, so the Lord will press and
persecute the Jews, and they shall turn whithersoever they will. For he
hereby indicates that after they have lost their worship and their
kingdom, they will be scattered throughout the world.

**The twenty-sixth chapter.**

So far, he has described the desolation of the synagogue and the Jewish
kingdom. Therefore, the song that follows here cannot be understood from
the earthly Jerusalem, but it must be taken from the church.

**V. 1. a solid city.**

We now have a completely different city, in which is the priesthood and
the kingdom of Christ. Its walls have salvation and victory, even
against the gates of hell.

**V. 2. Open the gates.**

3 This is a description of the citizens; the church is open to all who
want to enter. But these are \"the righteous people\" by keeping the
faith, or by keeping the faithful promises (quae servat fidelia), that
is, the promises and the covenant, and by believing the word.

**V. 3. You always receive peace.**

\(4\) He says of the head and king of this city that he will keep peace
everywhere; outwardly against the world, the flesh and Satan; inwardly
against the conscience, so that we may be at peace in our minds. This is
not by our doing, but by the mercy of Him who promised it before. And
this peace is not kept in any other way than through hope, which is to
be noted.

is to be reckoned with. For he who does not rely on Christ will never be
at rest. But to rely on Christ is difficult because the flesh is always
looking for something on which it can safely rely; and it cannot rely on
such things as are not seen. But the prophet reminds us that it is in
vain to try to do so, because this peace lies solely in the fact that we
hope in Christ. So it will happen that we will have peace with God and
man. For since we are in one and the same body and have the same head,
namely Christ, we are equal among ourselves and have no opportunity for
disagreement.

\(5\) This must be often urged in sermons, that men may know how peace
is among brethren, not by equality of morals or of dress, as foolish men
think at this time, but by the equality of hope and confidence which we
have through Christ, and which is common to all alike. But as Christ is
One, so also is One hope and One faith.

**V. 4. Therefore rely on the Lord forever.**

6 Do not fall away in temptations; hope always. God does not get tired
or weary.

**316** k. xxu, 221-22:;. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 36, 4-8.
W. Vl, 4S1-4S4. **317**

to help you; only do not grow weary and tired of hoping in him and
calling upon him.

This is a very necessary reminder. For Satan has been practiced from the
beginning of the world and has become even more cunning through daily
practice. If he cannot overcome us by the greatness of the temptations,
he seeks to overpower us by stopping us until he tires us. Often,
therefore, he does not allow those who would gladly die to be killed, so
that he may overcome them by overpowering them, if he cannot overcome
them by force and cunning. And this is the supreme wickedness of Satan;
to overcome it, we must strengthen our hearts with this and other
passages of Scripture, so that just as he does not tire of assailing us,
so we may not tire of persevering in prayer and hope until we obtain the
victory. \"For GOD the LORD (says the prophet here) is a rock forever.\"
\"He that is in us is greater than he that is in the world\" \[1 John
4:4\]. As much cunning is there, so much strength is here. Therefore
hope, and do not grow weary 2c.

**V. 5: And he bowed down them that dwell on high.**

\(8\) This is against presumption, as the foregoing is against despair.
For this is the constant contrast until the end of the chapter, that the
wicked perish, but the godly are preserved. But this is to increase the
fear of God in our hearts, so that we will not be presumptuous about any
gift of God. For since the city of Jerusalem, which was very fortified
and founded and built on the Word of God, has been so destroyed that
there are not even certain traces of where it stood, God shows us how He
cannot suffer any presumption. \"He calls Jerusalem \"the high city.

V. 6. **that it will be trampled underfoot.**

9 This is the description of a city in ruins, as if to say, Your walls
and ramparts will be leveled to the earth, so that a pedestrian can walk
over them.

**V. 7. But the way of the righteous is evil.**

10 These are promises of the preservation of the true doctrine. That is,
the godly are well, they have a good conscience; they remain in the
simplicity of faith and word, as also Paul says Gal. 6, 16: \"As many as
walk according to this rule, upon them be peace.\"

**V. 8. in the way of your right.**

\(11\) Because we use the word diligently, we abide in the true doctrine
and hope. For here he indicates the way in which they can remain in the
true doctrine, namely, if they handle the word diligently. Just as it is
said in the Proverbs of Solomon \[Cap. 29, 18.\], \"When the prophecy is
out, the people become wild and desolate,\" that is, when the word
ceases, there follow mobs and heretics who make the people wild and
desolate. Therefore I exhort you often to pray diligently against this
temptation, by which one becomes weary of the word and disgusted with
it. In this temptation are those who, puffed up by the conceit of
knowledge, think they understand the word sufficiently, and become sure
and puffed up, as we see in the Sacramentans and Anabaptists, who have
quickly become masters, have fallen asleep to the word as a known thing,
and have invented new opinions, by which they have fallen both from
faith and from love.

This is how it is with those who quickly become doctors and masters in
one year. But it is a terrible case. For as soon as we are sick and
tired of the word, either the death of the soul itself is there, or the
gates of death and the cause of death. Therefore the prophet saith, \"We
wait for thee, O Lord, in the way of thy right hand.\" For righteous
shepherds of souls in the church keep their people by the word. Further,
it is emphatically spoken, \"We wait for thee.\" As if to say, Though we
see thee not, yet have we the word alone on which we rely. We go along
in confidence and hope, which we nourish by the way of thy right 2c.

318 L. XXII, 223-225. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 494-497.
319

**The heart\'s desire is for your name and your memory. ^r^)**

\(13\) \"The desire of the heart\" is what he calls the fervent love
(disiderium) that comes from the bottom of the heart and from the
innermost inclination (affectu) that there is a desire in us, not for
our name, but for the benefits that God has done for us, that we
remember them and by remembering them awaken us to thanksgiving. The
remembrance of the name of the Lord in the Law was that he had brought
them out of Egypt. Today, in the New Testament, the memory and name of
the Lord is that he did not spare his own Son, but gave him for us all.
We praise this memory and this blessing not only in sermons and with our
tongues, but out of our hearts, because we believe that Christ is our
wisdom, our righteousness, our sanctification and resurrection \[1 Cor.
1:30\], so that we place our trust not in our works, but in Christ\'s
merit. This is the most sweet remembrance of the benefits of Christ,
which is not in thought (speculativa), as the monks invent it, but in
outward boasting, which is done by the public preaching of the word,
which we practice daily, as Paul also exhorts: \"Let the word of Christ
dwell among you richly\" \[Col. 3:16\].

**V. 9. For this with my spirit 2c.**

14 He expresses the ardent inclination, in contrast to the morose
chatterers, in whom there is not a spark of serious inclination, as we
see in Erasmus. When he deals with the Holy Scriptures, he brings forth
nothing but a sack full of empty words, teaches and says nothing out of
a movement of the heart. There are many such people today, who, since
there is not a drop of true heart movement in them, nevertheless want to
be judges of our and all theological matters. If they were to fight
against Satan, they would only then find out what kind of theologians
they are.

r\) Instead of ? 13, the following is found in the 1532 edition:
\"Gedächtniß\" means the preaching of the benefits of Christ. And he
also says: \"to your name\", but not: to our name.

\(15\) Therefore I command you, dear fathers and brethren, this text,
that ye beware of the disgust and surfeiting of the word, lest ye be
like them which were disgusted with the manna in the wilderness. For the
word of God is food; he who eats it hungers for it even more. Therefore
the word of God shall be abundant among us, but we shall not be full of
it. But we have the most certain promises and comforts that the word
will not go without fruit if it is diligently pursued. Therefore, let us
be all the more diligent and fervent in our pursuit of it, and let us
not give place to the disgust with which Satan accuses us.

**For where your justice is done in the land, the inhabitants of the
earth learn righteousness.**

\(16\) This is a glorious passage of the outward preaching of the word,
that it should not return without fruit. He calls it \"rights\" because
the gospel condemns all men\'s works and deeds, and offers only
Christ\'s merits, on which we are to rely. If these rights are not
there, people are deceived, and they learn ungodliness under the
appearance of righteousness. Therefore, where the word is not, there is
not righteousness. Consequently, the whole papacy is pure
unrighteousness, because it persecutes the Word of God.

**V. 10. But even though the wicked are offered grace, 1) they do not
learn righteousness.**

This is a reply to an objection. Although the wicked is offered grace
through the word, he does not learn righteousness. For this is the
meaning in Hebrew. But against this vexation the foregoing saying shall
comfort us, that though we see no, or very little, progress of the word,
yet we may not cease to teach it. Because of this, since the wicked are
not converted, one should not refrain from the duty of teaching it. For
there are always some who desire to be under-

1\> In the complete editions: Missi-sntnr; but in the 1532 edition and
in the Vulgate: Llisersumur. - In the Jena: impiorum instead of: iruxio.

**320** L. XXII, 22S-228. short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 26, 10.
11. W. VI, 497-4S9. **321**

to be judged. Yes, even if nothing else is achieved, the place is
claimed that Satan cannot teach and spread his poison among the people.
Thus, the fault is not in the teaching, but in the people, that not all
are converted. This is what the Holy Spirit says beforehand, so that we
do not get angry and therefore refrain from teaching. For this challenge
is very burdensome to godly teachers, that they see that the word is so
despised.

**But they only do evil in the right country. ^s^)**

18 \[Instead of: In terra sanctorum iniqua gessit in the Vulgate\] the
Hebrew has: The wicked sins in the right country, that is, in the
country which sees what is right among those who are right, who deviate
neither to the left nor to the right, who walk in the right way, and
neither put their trust in their works nor despair because of their
sins. For this is rightness. Nevertheless the wicked is not corrected,
he does not cease from his unrighteousness, but he makes much trouble
for those who walk rightly, and hinders the word. But this passage
comforts us against the calumnies of our adversaries. Seeing that many
among us live in very great licentiousness, they reproach us: Behold,
these are the evangelicals. To these Christ answers here, saying that it
is true that the Church has her enemies, both internal and external. The
external ones are the tyrants and the whole papacy; the internal ones
are the false brethren. These we must suffer, who only do evil in the
right country. For this reason, however, the errors of these people are
not to be attributed to the church.

\(19\) The church is well when it has such internal enemies, just as the
body is well when it casts out filth, and is no less healthy because it
has filth of excrement and sweat in it. So is

s\) Instead of §§ 18 and 19, the 1532 edition contains the following:
Just as in the human body there is filth, so also in the church there
are godless people, who plague the tyrants and false brothers. The eyes
have their filth, likewise the ears. So among the teachers and listeners
of the church there must be some evil ones.

The church, too, among the ungodly, and this is the glory in the church,
that it can cast out this filth, just as the human body could not cast
out these superfluous things and filth if it were not healthy. Just as
it would be the greatest foolishness to condemn a beautiful virgin
because she has excrement and other impurities in her body, so also our
adversaries commit the greatest foolishness by reproaching us with the
faults of our false brethren. The eyes with which we see have their
impurity; the ears also with which we hear have their filth: so also in
the church are some wicked, both teachers and disciples; but therefore
the whole body is not condemned.

**For they do not see the glory of the Lord.**

God has given the highest goods to His Church: Christ His Son, the faith
that overcomes all danger, true good works, the Holy Spirit, the
understanding of the Scriptures, the peace of conscience 2c. But these
high goods are hidden, and the glory of the Lord is hidden under
poverty, under shame, under weaknesses and other evils, with which the
church, oppressed by Satan and the world, lies on the ground. The
wicked, then, look only at this outward appearance, and because they
have unclean eyes, they see nothing but that which is unclean. But they
do not see the goods of which I have spoken. This is just as if one did
not want to look at the face of a man, but only at the shameful parts of
the body. Because of a small oversight, they immediately cry out:
Behold, these are the fruits of the gospel which they teach. But they do
not see that through the gospel they are freed from the tyranny of the
pope, from purgatory, from auricular confession, and from innumerable
other burdens. Much less do they see the forgiveness of sins, the peace
of conscience, the certain hope of eternal life, the victory over death
and over all adversity 2c.

**V. 11: Lord, your hand is lifted up; they do not see it.**

In the midst of these weaknesses and tribulations of the church, your
hand is lifted up,

322 L. XXII. 228-230. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 499-502.
323

because Christians are daily justified in sins, live in death, are
praised in shame and are glorious. The wicked do not see this, because
they judge only by outward appearances and by filth. But we see the hand
of the Lord lifted up, which they consider to be oppressed. Thus, when
they burned John Hus, they did not see the exalted hand of the Lord.

**But when they see it, they will be put to shame.**

\(22\) When they see the exalted hand, that they cannot suppress the
church gathered from the Gentiles, they will be zealous about it until
they perish. ^t^) So it was not seen that the hand of Christ was lifted
up when he hung on the cross; not even then, when Christians were being
killed everywhere. But when, contrary to all the expectations of the
wicked, the crucified Christ and the slain martyrs were praised more and
more every day, and the church increased by the accession of the
Gentiles, they saw the outstretched hand of the Lord. But they saw it
not for their edification, but for their consternation, just as today
some princes are especially angry and furious because they see that our
doctrine cannot be suppressed by all their attacks and forces.

**For this you will consume them with fire, that you may consume your
enemies.**

23 \[Instead of: Ignis hostes tuos devoret in the Vulgate\] the Hebrew
has: You will consume them with the fire of your enemies, that is, with
such fire, so that you tend to consume your enemies. He borrowed this
figure from Moses, by which the extreme desolation is indicated, since,
as in a conflagration, nothing but ashes remain. We still see this
punishment in the Jews today, and we will see the same in our princes in
the future. The word will remain, and we will also remain at the same
time, if they kill us right away. Just as it happened to John Hus, whose
name and memory remain in the congregation of the righteous. There-

t\) From here to §24 (sxel.) the edition of 1532 has only the words: We
see this punishment still on the Jews.

against his adversaries name has perished at the same time with them.

**V. 12. But to us, O Lord, you will make peace.**

24\. because the church has all that it has from Christ, and all that it
does is by the effect of Christ, and because the strength, wisdom,
righteousness 2c. that it has is Christ\'s, therefore it will stand
securely for eternity. Again, because the adversary\'s righteousness,
power, works 2c. come from their own powers, therefore they will perish.

**V. 13. Other lords rule over us than you.**

Here he describes the outward appearance and the repugnance (stercus) of
the church, namely that it, pressed to the ground by the world, lies
down, does not rule, does not judge, but must rule over itself and be
judged, according to the saying \[Gen. 25:23\]: \"The greater will serve
the lesser\"; likewise: \"In the world you are afraid\" 2c. \[John
16:33.\]

**But we remember you and your name alone.**

\(26\) Though we are so afflicted according to the outward man, yet thou
art our Lord, and triumphest in us. Therefore we are not without the
Lord, even though it seems from outward appearance that we have been
rejected by you. But we rise up against this outward appearance by the
remembrance of thy name, praising thee, glorifying thee, and doing thy
word. For this means \"the remembrance\".

**V. 14. The dead do not remain alive.**

27\. instead of the present tense in the Vulgate, vivant, the future
tense must be read: non vivent \[they will not live\]. We, who are
oppressed, remember your name, and although it seems that we are given
over to death, we take comfort in knowing that the enemies who rule over
us will die and not remain alive, that is, they will not have the hope
of life in death that we have.

324 **230-233.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 26, 14-18. W. vi,
**502-505.** 325

**The deceased do not rise (Gigantes non resurgent.** [1)]{.underline}

28 The word gigas sometimes means a physician, sometimes one who has
departed from this world and died, as here, sometimes also a giant. What
the meaning of this is, I do not know, unless the Hebrews, according to
the figure of speech of antiphrasis, also call a giant a dead man. Here,
however, he calls those dead who are still alive. But it must be
understood both from the present death of the wicked and from the future
judgment, because the wicked, even though they are still alive, are
dead; just as the Christians, though they are already dead, are alive.

**V. 15. But you, Lord, continue among the Gentiles.**

29\. since the Jews would not believe, you turned to the Gentiles, among
whom you spread your word and your kingdom. Thus the enemies of the word
will perish, but the word of the Lord endures forever \[Isa. 40:8\].
Further, this verse should be translated thus: Adjecisti genti, Domine,
adjecisti genti; glorificatus es, et prolongasti usque ad fines
terrae,^3^ ) means, your name is taught and preached everywhere, even in
the uttermost parts of the world.

**You always lead on among the Gentiles (In^-^ dulsisti genti,
Domine**[).]{.underline}

30 Translate: \"You continue among the Gentiles\", that is, you increase
your church by the addition of the Gentiles after the unbelieving
synagogue has been rejected. So your glory spreads through the gospel to
the ends of the earth. The meaning is therefore this: The enemies of the
gospel perish, but the word of the Lord remains forever \[Is. 40, 8\].

**V. 16. Lord, when there is tribulation, one seeks you.**

1\) In the Vulgate: rssurZant; again the present tense instead of the
future tense.

2\) Cf. Walch, St, Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1722, note.

3\) In the Vulgate: Indrdsisti Zsnti, Oornins, indrdsisti Miiti;
num\^uid Aloriticutus es? slonMSti OMN68 terminos terras.

He still continues to set the godly and the godless against each other.
The gospel is spread to the uttermost parts of the earth, though all
princes and kings oppose it, but the spreading is done in weakness. For
both the teachers and the disciples of it are pressed with the holy
cross, which is thy discipline, by which thou teachest and keepest thy
own in their duty. This discipline is as necessary to the spirit as food
and drink are to the body. For without affliction the word cannot prove
its power. And just as iron becomes bright through use, so also a
Christian is instructed and helped through trials, as it is said in
Proverbs, \"The rod 4) makes pious children.\"

32\. but he adds an excellent doctrine: in chastening, he says (that is,
\"when you chasten them\"), \"they cry out fearfully\" (*in* 5)
disciplina clamor murmuris est), \"there is a fearful crying.\" They do
not cry out, they do not act piteously, as the wicked are wont to do in
adversity, but they utter inexpressible sighs, which come forth through
the mouth as a murmur, as the summoners are wont to murmur. Paul aims at
this passage in the eighth chapter to the Romans \[v. 26.\]: \"The
Spirit represents us with inexpressible groaning.\" For a Christian in
his affliction should not weep, nor run to and fro, nor act piteously,
nor become fainthearted, nor blaspheme, nor despair, but sigh to the
Lord with patience. So today we have no other remedy against the princes
and bishops who are our ruthlessness than this anxious sighing.

**V. 17. 18. Like a pregnant woman.**

33 Christ also uses this simile in John \[Cap. 16, 21\]. But with it the
extreme danger is indicated, since there is no means nor way to escape.
For the mother is forced to submit to the danger of death, because the
child wants to be born. But this parable contains a great consolation,
because a Christian

4\) In the original: \"rods\", for which we have put \"the rod\".

5\) in missing in dev Wittenberger.

326 **XXII, 233-235. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 505-509.**
327

is saved by birth, and does not perish in birth. Thus every tribulation
is a birth, by which the new man is born, and the old dies. For faith
and the reputation of the word increase in such trials, so that whether
prison, or sword, or pestilence, or death, be at hand, thou mayest say:
Behold, I am now in birth. Here I must stand firm, and wait upon God,
and endure the pains of childbirth until I give birth. It is a work of
great faith that one endures here; but nevertheless there is no other
way to get through. What the Latin translator has given here: Peperimus
spiritum salutis, should be translated thus: Et angimur, ut vix spiritum
trahere possimus \[And we are frightened, so that we can hardly get
breath\].

**We cannot help the country yet.**

\(34\) Though we strive anxiously, we do nothing to the wicked, neither
by preaching, nor by threatening, nor by enduring all evil; they remain
blinded in their minds and hearts.

**V. 19. But your dead will live.**

35 As Paul says in 2 Cor. 6:9, \"As those who are dying, behold, we
live.\" When Christians are thought to be dying, they are living. Christ
says \[John 16:33.\], \"In me ye have peace, but in the world ye fear.\"
For Christians are like sheep for slaughter \[Rom. 8:36.), destined to
die, let death follow, or let it not follow. But our consolation is that
we will live when we have died, so that it is a general saying, which
also includes the special saying of the last judgment.

**Wake up.**

This is a promise for Christians in this life. You, who are exposed to
death, do not become dull. \"Glory to you who sit in the dust,\" that
is, who are considered dead by the wicked.

**For your thane is a thau of the green field.**

The giants will perish, but the Christians will live, and they will live
without any human work, just as the dew falls from above without any
human work. Moreover, the blood of the Christians is, as it were, the
dew with which the church is moistened and by which the tyrants are
conquered.

**V. 20. Go, my people.**

38 This is the same as what is written in the 4th Psalm, v. 5: \"If you
are angry, do not sin\"; that is, endure the hand of the Lord and
suffer. There is still a moment to be done, and help will come. Do not
be miserable, and do not run to and fro; restrain yourself, and keep
yourself upright by the word. \"Go into your chamber,\" there pray and
contemplate God\'s word. \"Hide thyself a little moment.\" Anger is not
(as it seems to you when you follow your sensation and reason)
everlasting, but it lasts only a moment. Do thou but endure, and suffer.
Thus Peter says of Christ \[1. Ep. 2, 23.) that he did not smell
himself, but brought his cause home to him who judges rightly.

39\) These are the most emphatic promises and consolations, and truly
words of life, by which we are lifted up in tribulation, so that we
believe that it is not the wrath of God when we suffer tribulation, and
that the tribulation will not last forever, but only for a moment, as
Christ also calls the time of tribulation \"a little\" in the Gospel
\[John 16:16\].

**V. 21. For behold, the LORD.**

40\. Your enemies will suffer punishment, for their blood will not be
hidden 2c. He alludes to the story of Abel \[Gen. 4, 10\]. Thus they dug
up the earth on which John Hus was burned a cubit deep; nevertheless,
his memory could not be hidden, but it is still famous today in the
congregation of the saints.

[**328** L. XXII, 235-237. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 27, 1-3.
W. VI, 509-512. **Z29**]{.underline}

**The twenty-seventh chapter.**

In this chapter he indicates that at the time of Christ\'s future the
Lord will strike the Egyptians, Assyrians and Jews, and all the other
kingdoms of the world, by the sword of the Romans, so that peace may be
established in the whole world and the gospel may be spread safely
through the apostles into all countries. After that he comes back to his
church.

**V. 1. with his hard sword.**

2\. so he calls the Romans, who are also called \"iron\" by Daniel
\[Dan. 2, 40.\].

**Leviathan.**

The scriptures figuratively call the world a sea, and the princes of the
world great fishes. Thus Ezekiel \[Cap. 29, 3.\] calls the king in Egypt
the dragon in the river. So Isaiah here calls both the Egyptian and the
Assyrian, a \"Leviathan,\" that is, a whale-fish, of which the one had
his kingdom on the Euphrates, the other on the Nile River. \"Leviathan,
who is a crooked serpent,\" he calls a calm and quiet kingdom. \"But
Leviathan, which is a straight serpent,\" he calls a warlike kingdom.
And thus he has summed up all the kingdoms, as if to say: both those
kingdoms which are always at war and those which are quiet will all be
conquered by the Romans through war, so that peace may thus be procured
for the Gospel. For \"whale\" or \"dragon\" he has put instead of the
plural, as if he wanted to say: All dominions, kingdoms and princes that
exist only somewhere.

V. 2. **At that time they will sing of the vineyard of the best wine.**

When these kings will be subjugated, then they will sing of the chosen
vineyard, that is, of the holy church, which he opposes to the vineyard,
of which it was said above in the fifth chapter 4 ff\]. was said above.

1\) Wittenberger: Hniu instead of: Hui.

**V. 3. I, the Lord, keep him.**

5 These are excellent promises. The church, he says, will have this
glory, that Moses and hired servants will no longer be its guardians,
but the Lord himself will be guardian, shepherd, high priest, master and
father, as Christ says: \"One is your master and father\", Matth. 23, 9.
10. For Christ alone sustains his church through the word and his
spirit, as it says in the letter to the Ephesians Cap. 1,^2^ ) 22. 23.
that he is the head and the church his body. Where this head is not,
where there is another guardian of this vineyard, there must necessarily
be heresies.

**And wet him soon.**

\(6\) I will quickly moisten it, so that it will not become dry, so that
it will not be weakened by the manifold temptations of Satan and the
persecutions of the world, and also by the burden of sins and the
dangers of death. These cause thirst; therefore it is necessary that he
be moistened. So he promises: \"I will be present with comfort for the
fainthearted, and I will be so close that not even a leaf will fall. So
Christ does both: he plants his church; after it is planted, when it has
to suffer something, he also supports it and comforts it. But it is
sweet to believe in Christ. For he that believeth hath all these
promises.

**I will guard him day and night.**

7 This is: I am unwearied in the preservation of my church. For by day I
seek her, lest in good days she be presumptuous and luxuriant; and by
night, lest in adversity she despair. Thus with Paul he made night out
of day, when he sent Satan\'s angel to him, who smote him with fists \[2
Cor. 12:7\].

u\) Instead of § 5, the 1532 edition says: No longer Moses and hired
servants, but the Lord will be master, father, bishop, king, priest 2c.

2\) In the Latin editions: 4.

330 L. xxn, 237-240. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 512-SIS.
331

**V. 4. God is not angry with me.**

8 This is a golden promise by which he affirms the previous one.
Indignatio non est mihi, \"I know of no wrath.\" For how can he who died
for us be angry with us? Therefore, although he appears to be angry, it
is not true that he is angry. Thus Satan\'s angel is sent upon Paul; but
this is not wrath, for Christ himself saith \[2 Cor. 12:9.\], \"Be thou
content with my grace.\" Thus a father chastises his son when he has
sinned; but this is not wrath, although it seems to be wrath. Therefore,
the care of the vineyard requires God to let such a semblance of wrath
come at times, so that the vineyard will not be spoiled by riotousness;
but it is not wrath. This is an apt text \"to be written on all
tribulations.\" I know of no wrath, I cannot wrath. But that he seems to
be angry, that is the guarding of the vineyard, that thou perish not,
and be safe 2c. This word that denies God\'s wrath (haec negativa) is a
golden one.

**Oh, that I would get with the hedges and thorns! (Quis dabit me
spinam?)**

9 This he says against our thoughts, which the flesh and Satan blow in
during temptations. For then we are wont to do so: we interpret his
protection as wrath, his chastening as anger. Therefore he punishes us,
saying, \"Do not let it occur to you that I am thorns and hedges, that I
am at war with you, that I want to kick you to the ground and set you on
fire. Satan blows these thoughts into your head, which are against faith
and ungodly. Therefore banish them from your heart, and beware of Satan,
who is disguising himself in my image, that I should appear to be fire
and thorns, who am a comforter and a redeemer. But these promises must
be held fast in the time of temptation, that he shall not be a thorn,
but that his name shall be, \"The bruised reed shall he not break. \"2c.
\[Isa. 42:3.\]

**So I wanted to tear under them.**

The Latin text is not properly divided here, because it must be so: Who
wants me

To make a thorn and a hedge in the battle? that I might tread it \[the
vineyard\] to the ground and set it on fire?

011 But as he said before that he was not a thorn, so here also he says
that he is not a tramp, and that he is not angry with his vineyard, as
it seems when he plagues it. As if he wanted to say: These are false
interpreters who say that I tear and tread down my vineyard. These are
golden consolations, that he saith, He giveth us not such thoughts, but
is offended by the same. This must be learned in order to comfort the
brethren with it, so that they do not give room to Satan, who enters
such ungodly thoughts and makes thorns and hedges out of him who builds
and waters his vineyard. They must be reminded of this passage, that God
says here in clear words: Do you think that I will be a thorn in the
battle? I know of no wrath 2c.

**V. 5. He will keep me by my strength (Quis tenebit fortitudinem
meam?).**

12\. Who is he who will prevent me from building my vineyard and protect
it from the violence of tyrants? Thus we see that Christ is offended by
these thoughts, which turn Him from a Savior and brother into our judge
and enemy. \"It grieves the man greatly that he should be thought
otherwise than a gracious GOD.\"

**And will bring me peace.**

\(13\) Let no one resist me, lest I protect and comfort my church, which
will have peace even in strife; it will have comfort even in
tribulations. There will be peace in the church even in the midst of
war; the consciences will be secure even in the midst of sins and
perils. For I will still be a king of peace, though all oppose.

**V. 6. that they fill the ground with fruit.**

The more tribulations my church has to endure, the more it grows.
Translate like this: The time will come when Jacob will take root, and
Israel will bear fruit, and fill the ground with fruit 2c.

332 n. XXU, **240-242.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 27, 7-9.
W. **VI, 515-519.** 333

**V. 7. Yet he is not beaten as his enemies beat him. ^v^)**

15\. The Church is also struck by God, but not in the way its enemies
would strike it. For this would make God a thorn and a hedge. But He
smites, not as one who smites, but as one who heals, as a lover, as a
father and friend. But this striking is healing, as it is said in
Proverbs \[Cap. 27, 6.\], \"The blows of the lover are better than the
kisses of the hater.\" Likewise \[Sir. 30, 1.\], \"He that loveth his
child keepeth it always under the rod,\" just as the physician applies
the more bitter medicines to dangerous diseases. If a fool came to the
sick person and said, \"Behold, what a bitter potion this is, the
physician wants to kill you; why does he not give you wine?\" 2c., would
it not be the greatest folly to believe such a fool and throw away the
medicine?

16 Satan and our flesh do the same when God sends us tribulation. For
there he gives us the thought: Behold, God throws you into prison, he
puts you in danger of your life; certainly he hates you, he is angry
with you; for if he did not hate you, he would not let this happen. Thus
Satan turns the rod of the Father into a hangman\'s rope, and the
healing medicine into the most dangerous poison. But it is unbelievable
what a thousandfold artist he is in inventing such thoughts. Therefore,
it is very difficult to make a distinction in the tribulation between
the one who kills and the one who chastises in a loving way. That is why
Christ comforts us in this passage that even though he killed, he still
killed in the manner and with the heart of a life-director. Satan does
the opposite. The expression: Iuxta plagam percutientis is to be taken
actively, that is, as an enemy is wont to strike.

**V. 8. But with moderation you judge them (In mensura contra
mensuram).**

17 The meaning according to the Hebrew is this: With moderation you
judge them, and let them go, v) These words are interpreted (instead of
in the 15 and 16) in the edition of 1532 so: God prods his church
kindly, that he may help it, not that he may destroy it, as the enemies
are wont to strike.

after you have afflicted them with your harsh east wind. But here he
describes the way and the heart with which God chastises His church,
namely that He chastises them in such a way that He lets them go in
time. This the enemies do not do, but they say: \"Clean off, clean off,
down to the ground\" \[Ps. 137, 7\]. But what is the fruit of this
chastening? This he now adds.

**V. 9. Therefore the sin of Jacob will cease. ^w^)**

18 The cross, he says, serves to exercise the forgiveness of sins, that
is, to kill the remnants of sin. For if God did not at times exercise us
in the cross, we would surely and easily be perverted by Satan. Thus the
epistle to the Hebrews \[Cap. 12, 5. ff.\] teaches us what the cross is
good for. For God would not lift a finger to chastise us if he did not
see to our benefit.

\(19\) This passage may be diligently noted by those who are to comfort
the afflicted, first, that it is the chastening of a father, and
secondly, that it is an idle chastening, not a cruel one, or after the
manner of an enemy. Third, that it is also useful and necessary to atone
for sin. For if we were not chastened at times, 1) we would become
secure, fall into presumption, and perish in our sins. But when Satan
and the world and our conscience press us, we are driven to the true
exercises of faith, that we call upon God and expect help from Him. But
this is a great comfort, that we know,

w\) Instead of §§ 18 and 19, the edition of 1532 says: \'Here the
prophet treats the whole doctrine of the tribulations diligently and
extensively. For hitherto he has described the mind of him who
chastises, and the manner of the chastisement. Now he will also describe
the benefit and the necessity. The cross, he says, belongs to the
forgiveness of sins, that is, to put to death what is left of sins. For
if God did not exercise us at times in the cross, we would be safe and
easily overthrown by Satan. Paul also says that his stake was useful to
him, so that he would not exalt himself \[2 Cor. 12:7\]. Thus the cross
is not only useful, but also necessary.

1\) In the Wittenberg, the Jena and the Erlangen: ouKtiAurernur,
intsrckurn. That the comma should be placed only after interäum is
proven by the first redaction below.

334 **L. XXII, 242-24 PP. Interpretations On the Prophets. W. VI,
519-522.** 335

Christ seeks this through the cross, that you may believe and call on
him more and more, so that the Spirit and grace may be increased in you.
Therefore Paul says that his stake in the flesh had this benefit for
him, so that he would not exaggerate \[2 Cor. 12:7\]. For this is the
only means God uses to eradicate all sin.

**In that he makes all the stones of the altar.**

\(20\) God\'s chastisement causes all the stones of the altar to be
crushed, that is, He removes all idolatry. But the highest idolatry is
presumption and confidence in our powers. This grows when we are secure;
but when we are chastened, it falls away. And it is this that he says:
Sin is atoned for through the cross.

But this is a theological doctrine, the implication of which the flesh
cannot comprehend. Therefore, it seems to be somewhat obscure. He says:
Your sins will be taken away, and your altars will be torn down by this
chastisement. For he indicates that God most hates the trust and
presumption of our heart in other things. For this is the idol of our
heart, which is rejected in the first commandment; this is the source of
all sin, just as the source of all holiness and righteousness is the
first commandment, which holds fear and trust in the true God. Where
these are not, there is necessarily ignorance and contempt of God, that
the heart fears where there is nothing to fear, and relies on lies where
there is nothing to believe (ubi non est fides - where there is no faith
and belief). With this false confidence all prophets have to contend.
For it is the origin of all evil. For from where do heretics arise? Of
course, because they put their trust in their wisdom. Whence do tyrants
arise? Because they have confidence in their power. Whence come saints
of works? Because they put confidence in their works. So when the
prophet says that sin will be atoned for by the chastening of the Lord,
he cites this reliance on ungodly worship as the greatest and most noble
sin, from which all other sins spring.

\(22\) Furthermore, the service or worship of the altars and groves came
from the inward idolatry of the heart. For the Jews were not such fools
that they worshipped wood and stones for God, but this was their opinion
that this service was pleasing to God. This opinion was the idol they
\"worshipped,\" namely, that God would be propitiated with such works as
they themselves had chosen without a certain word. And this is the
ungodly trust that all prophets reject, and that necessarily follows the
self-chosen worship that we ourselves begin without God\'s word.
Otherwise, why start them? Thus, no one would become a monk if he did
not follow this idol of his heart and worship it: God approves of
monasticism 2c. But this is an obvious idolatry, because one puts his
trust in something other than that in which GOD has commanded that one
should put his trust. And this follows quite clearly from the first
commandment, where it is commanded that we should put our trust in GOD.
The monastic state, however, is not God, nor is it commanded by God;
consequently, the trust that is placed in the monastic state is ungodly
and predatory of God.

Furthermore, we must not think that we are completely free from this
plague. For it is an error that is innate in our flesh. We experience it
in ourselves that we trust more easily in our works than in the promises
of God. But there are few who recognize this wickedness of the human
heart. At least, no one recognizes it perfectly except God. Therefore,
we are driven by His chastening to abandon the idolatry of false trust.
For the chastisement and the sensation of punishment make us seek true
faith, that is, to call upon God, and thus both exercise our faith and
grow in faith. This means that all the stones of the altar will be
reduced to ashes only when all trust and presumption in one\'s own
strength is removed. For to raise up stones is the fruit of an apostate
heart, and one that trusts in itself.

336 **L XXII, 245-247. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Eap. 27, 9-13.
28. VI, 522-526.** 337

\(24\) Therefore, the Christian life does not consist in making more and
more fast days and other such vain things, but in increasing trust in
God and decreasing trust in oneself, so that one is no longer afraid
either of death or of the devil. To this end, he says, I seek to bring
it with my chastisement. But he does not call any idol by name, so that
he may summarize all inward idolatry. And this teaching has put all
prophets, including us today, in danger of death.

**V. 10. For the strong city must become lonely.**

\(25\) This is a contrast. The godly are killed by the cross, and are
saved; but the wicked flee from the cross, and continue in their
presumption, therefore they will perish utterly. The fact that he says
\"the strong city\" refers to the confidence of the Jews, who relied on
their temple and worship and were secure against all dangers. As if he
wanted to say: They may be confident as much as they want, but it is
certain that they must perish, because they do not rely on the Lord, but
on their lies. Just as now the papists everywhere boast that the church
will not perish completely, even if it was in danger for a while.

**That calves graze and rest there.**

He describes the future desolation and loneliness. If someone wants to
give a secret interpretation, it is this: it is common that in the
places where one did not want to give sustenance to the saints, then the
devil and ungodly teachers are found.

nourished. So it will happen that they will be burned like chaff.

**V. 11. Their branches will break from drought.**

27 \[Instead of: In siccitate messis illius etc. in the Vulgate\] must
be translated thus: Their branches will break with drought. The women
will come and burn them. But this picture means the useless doing of the
unbelieving Jews. And this is the punishment of presumption, by which
the presumptuous are not corrected; but they interpret it as a martyr\'s
suffering, and become still more angry and obstinate, as they also
interpret the good deeds as rewards. But we see that it is the same with
the papists. They are engaged in the most laborious works, and yet
produce nothing but chaff destined for eternal fire. But they do not
believe that.

**V. 12. At that time the Lord will cry 2c.**

28\) Those who are hardened despise the word and perish; nevertheless,
those who remain will be gathered from all places through the preaching
of the apostles. For the gospel will go from the Euphrates to Egypt.

**V. 13. At that time a great trumpet will be blown.**

The trumpet is the gospel, which will not stand still between these two
rivers, but will also be spread further, so that the others will be
gathered to the church. For it was necessary that he add this comfort.
For it was hard spoken that all this people were rejected.

**The twenty-eighth chapter.**

Here is a great confusion in the order, because he describes what should
follow last, first, as the prophets usually do. For I understand the
first part of this chapter from the kingdom

Israel, which Judah despised out of arrogance. Therefore he proclaims to
Israel that it will be miserably devastated by Salmanasser and Sanherib,
the kings of Assyria. Those who want to understand it from Judah (which
is more appropriate to

338 L. XXII, 247-249. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, Z26-330.
339

seems to be),^x^ ) who take the word Ephraim for Judah by interchanging
the names (metonymice).

2\. \"The splendid crown of the drunkards\" he calls either the kingdom
of Israel or Judah to indicate the confidence and presumption of wealth,
power, holiness, wisdom 2c.

**V. 1. Above a fat valley.**

3 Thus he calls Samaria, which lay in a very fertile valley. Therefore,
the kingdom of Israel was called the kingdom of Samaria.

**V. 2. 3. Behold, a strong and mighty one from the Lord.**

This means the king of Assyria. But he uses such parables here, by which
he gives to understand that the power of the enemies will be so great
that they would not be able to resist it or to endure it.

**V. 4. like the ripening before summer.**

5\. Israel will then be like a fruit that has ripened before summer, and
which perishes while it is still hanging on the branch. This is an apt
image, that the wicked perish in the midst of their attacks, when they
already promise themselves victory, and do not bring their days to the
half \[Ps. 55, 24.\]. That is why in the Psalms they are compared to the
grass that grows on the roofs \[Ps. 129, 6.\]. And elsewhere \[Ps. 58,
10.\], \"Before your thorns are ripe.\" For it means that the thorns
were burned before they had come to the strength to prick. Such passages
of Scripture contain a great comfort that the storm of the wicked will
be destroyed in the midst of their efforts, since they least believe it,
but, drunk with the happy progress of their affairs, flourish and boast.
The cause is that the wicked are puffed up by success; but being puffed
up, they fall and perish.

**V. 5. At that time the LORD of hosts will be.**

6\. it seems that this piece could be related more poperly to the
kingdom of Judah, so that the opinion is this: if Judah is so devastated

x\) This parenthesis is missing in the 1532 edition.

and be led to Babylon, the rest will be preserved and brought back, as I
have said that the foregoing can also be understood of Judah, if one
wants to take Ephraim for Judah, which was a crown, that is, a glorious
kingdom, and therefore presumptuous and arrogant, by interchanging the
names. The head of this empire was Jerusalem, which lay on a mountain
and had fertile valleys toward the sea. Although this opinion is more
appropriate, the other seems to be more simple, as I have said, that we
take the foregoing to refer to the kingdom of Israel. Therefore I
understand also this of the rest from Israel, which went over to the
tribe Juda, as one reads in the books of the kings. But the reader may
judge about it himself, since both views are good.

V. 6. **and a spirit of justice to him who sits in judgment.**

7 That is, they shall receive from the Lord Himself the spirit of
judgment, that they may judge aright, and do their office, even as they
drew drunkenness out of that crown before, that they did neither speak
nor do anything aright.

**Those from the dispute come back to the Thor.**

8 That is, those who come back to peace after the war is over, if one
wants to take it from Judah. But if one wants to take it from Israel,
the opinion is also clear, because under Hezekiah many were brought back
to the tribe of Judah.

V. 7. **To this end, these have also become great from wine 2c.**

9 We must take this from the kingdom of Judah. But these, says he, who
hear the so great calamity of the Ephraimites, do not become better
thereby, they do not let the example move them 2c. but they sin
likewise. But this is an excellent virtue of the hypocrites, that they
ridicule God\'s word, and despise both the threats and the promises of
God.

**For both priests and prophets.**

\(10\) This is spiritual drunkenness, that they are drunk with ungodly
opinions, in.

340 **14. XXII, 249-252.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 28,
7-10. **W. VI, 530-533.** 341

education and trust in their righteousness, wisdom 2c. This must
necessarily happen with those who do not have the Word. For the Word
teaches how to make one\'s steps firm, \"that one may know what he is
doing,\" that he may know what is right and what is not right. And this
is our sobriety, that we may say: This pleases God. But those who do not
have the word of God are drunk, that is, uncertain. They have a good
opinion, to be sure. Perhaps, they say, this will please God. So they
waver in their steps and cannot make their consciences certain. But both
in all faculties and especially in theology, joyfulness or certainty is
necessary. But this is based on the word alone. Therefore those who do
not have the word are like a drunken peasant. It must be noted, however,
that he calls those drunkards who were rightfully called to the true
ministry of preaching.

**V. 8 For all the tables are full of spitting.**

\(11\) This is a good image, that all that is taught apart from the word
is spit, and that those who do not teach the word purely do not speak
but spit. The \"table\" means the pulpit, or the place from which one
teaches.

**V. 9: Whom shall he teach to know?**

t2. All are drunk, he says. Therefore, there is no place for the word of
God except among the \"weaned\", that is, among the simple-minded and
the afflicted, from whom God has withdrawn His comfort for a short time.
Thus says Christ \[Matth. 11, 5.\]: To the poor the gospel is preached.
^y^) For the gospel is learned only by the afflicted and the needy, from
whom the milk has been withdrawn, and who are bitten by the thorns of
conscience. And this is the reason that, since the word is spread
throughout the whole world, there are still very few who truly accept
it, because the majority are drunkards, that is, who let themselves be
hindered by foreign opinions, so that they cannot accept the word of
God. Because it is a word of life

y\) From here to §14 (sxd.), the 1532 edition has only the following:
The foreigners all have a disgust at the word, despise and laugh at it.

and grace, it has no place except among those who feel death and are
pressed by the wrath of God. It is a word of hope, therefore it belongs
to those who wrestle with despair. It is a word of strength, therefore
it belongs to the weak and to those who are overwhelmed with all kinds
of evils.

Therefore, no one is surprised that the heretics and tyrants rage and
rage so much against us. For the reason is obvious: they are drunkards
and not weaned; they do not feel the sins and the wrath of God. That is
why they cannot grasp this word.

\(14\) Wisdom and knowledge are thus distinguished from one another.
Wisdom is faith in Christ himself, and the knowledge of the truth.
Knowledge, however, is that judgment or knowledge which flows from
faith, and judges what agrees with faith and what does not. 2c.

**V. 10 For (they say): Give, give.**

\(15\) This is the word of the wicked, who mock and scoff at the prophet
who teaches the commandments of God, the promises which require faith,
and the cross which requires patience and waiting. For this is the order
of all the prophets in teaching, which we also had today. First the law
is taught, which commands; then the promises of Christ are added, who
has sufficed the law for us; then also of eternal life, of righteousness
2c. Because these promises, as long as we are in this flesh, cannot be
fully grasped, but must be expected in faith, and our flesh always
fights against faith, and prefers to use what is its, that is, the
present help: Therefore frequent encouragements to faith and
consolations are necessary, so that we do not succumb, so that we do not
fall away from faith, that we will certainly obtain that which is
promised, if we only persevere, and wait in certain hope for
righteousness, life 2c. life. So that all our doctrine is in these two
pieces, in the preaching of the

342 L. XXII, 252-2S4. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 533-536.
343

In the teaching of the law, which teaches good works, and in the
preaching of the gospel, which teaches faith. The third part is that in
both kinds of teaching, consolations must often be interspersed against
the cross that all the godly must necessarily bear.

016 But the wicked laugh at this, and despise it. Give here, give there,
they say; wait here, wait there. As if to say, 1) You can teach nothing
else but that we should do this and that, and refer us, I know not, to
what promises we should expect. It is better to follow the world, which
lives as it wills, and has certain protection and help on which it can
rely 2c. Just as it is said now: The Lutherans know nothing else to
teach but faith and the catechism. But when we comfort the afflicted
that they will be saved in a little while, they also laugh at this. Here
a little, there a little, they say, \"It is called a modicum \[little\],
for nothing at all comes of it.\" As if they wanted to say: 2) You teach
indeed of a little, that temptation will not last long, but will be
moderate; but one sees no end. This part of your teaching is also void.
For the flesh cannot persuade itself that the time of the cross is a
short time; but, because it judges only according to its carnal sense,
with disregard of the word, it thinks that the temptation is eternal.
Therefore it resists and resorts to carnal help, and will not take hold
of the doctrine of faith, which is not in feeling, but apart from all
feeling, only in waiting.

\(17\) But this passage fortifies us against the scandal of the cross.
For when the wicked hear the doctrine of faith, and yet see that the
pious are in evil, they conclude from this experience that this doctrine
is void. But we are to learn that godliness always has the cross and
tribulation as companions. This is what our bishops in the papacy would
have learned, if they had conducted their office with teaching and
serious concern for the churches.

1\) Erlanger: dient statt: diennt.

2\) Here also the Wittenberg has dient instead of diennt. In the Jena
one, just as before, the abbreviation \"H. d.\" is here.

But now, though they teach nothing, but are idle, and do other things,
they have good peace and abundance of all things. On the other hand,
those who teach the gospel have hardly any food to eat. For the devil
hates the word, therefore he seeks to destroy it by hunger. Therefore,
one needs this consolation: \"Wait, God will help over a little one\"
2c.

**V. 11. Well, he will speak once with mocking lips and with a different
tongue. 3)**

The Latin translator has \[instead of: \"with mocking lips\"\]: in
loquela labii etc.. Hereby he threatens the scoffers: One day I will
teach through the apostles the word of the gospel, wherewith I will mock
all your righteousness and the law; yea, I will utterly abolish the
same, and accept in your stead the Gentiles, which shall believe me, and
be my people; that ye may be offended, and be lost for ever.

\(19\) Note here the name by which the wicked call the gospel. For they
call it a strange tongue, and a mocking doctrine; when the fault is not
in the gospel, but in themselves. But to us it is a word of life; to
them it is a word of death and vexation 2c.

**V. 12. So you have peace.**

20 This is the preaching of the promises, grace and faith, which he
called above a doctrine of perseverance. This alone makes the conscience
calm and secure, because it presents Christ to us and gives him to us
with all his merits, with his righteousness, holiness 2c. Those who do
not want to hear this, will hear as punishment such teachers who preach
to them of all trouble and vexation, as follows:

**V. 13. Therefore the word of the Lord shall become even so unto
them.**

021 They have laughed at the preaching of the law, and at the promises,
and at the consolations: therefore it shall be a punishment unto them,
that they shall be punished.

3\) Instead of ioguetrnr in the editions, it will read (according to
both the Vulgate and the Hebrew) loyuetur.

344 **L. XXII, 254-257.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 28, 13.
W. **VI, 536-539.** 345

They burden themselves with the law, and they mate with their works,
that they dream and invent promises for themselves, and that they
comfort one another. But all this in vain. So now we see this punishment
in the Jews, that they indeed experience these words: \"Give, give\" 2c.
For in vain do they mate themselves with their works, in vain do they
wait for the Messiah, in vain do they comfort themselves that they will
yet be redeemed. So now their waiting is mocked in earnest.

\(22\) It is the same with our adversaries. For they ridicule us because
we only teach faith and insist on it. But what happens? They themselves
are forced to teach faith as well. And they teach faith, but a false
faith, according to which they believe the lies of the monks and the
statutes of men. Dear, who is mocking the other here? For we remain in
the true faith, which is based on the rock, Christ. They also remain in
the faith, but in the false faith, which is built on the sand, on
self-chosen worship and on their works. Thus in the schools of the
papists nothing is taught but: Give, give, works, works! This is their
punishment, because they ridicule Christ, who communicates his gifts to
us. Therefore they rightly expect a false Christ who is nowhere, who
looks upon their works and approves of them 2c. These are terrifying
threats, the examples of which we still see today in the Jews; and yet
there are few who accept the word of God with reverence and believe it.

**That they go there.**

\(23\) These are terrible threats against the presumptuous and hardened,
although those who are such people do not think that they are concerned
because they are blinded. The first is, \"that they go,\" namely, in the
imaginary, false, and fictitious word. For those who do not want to,
believe the lies.

**And fall back.**

24\. Their walk is not an increase, but a \"falling away\" from one
error into another. For just as Christ did his work

works in his own so that they grow from day to day in the knowledge of
God and in faith, there is no rest in the kingdom of Satan, but they
fall completely blinded from one error into the other. I have heard of
the most learned Jews who, when they had been convicted by me through
clear sayings of the Scriptures, stubbornly said: they wanted to stay
with their rabbis.

25 Thus, once one has strayed from the faith, there is no means or hope
of getting back on the right path, but the case follows \"that they fall
back. This is exactly what we have seen in the kingdom of the pope.
Since he first fell from the purity of faith, the monastic rules and
monasticism soon followed. After that, other errors were gradually made,
so that the monks sold their merits and put themselves in Christ\'s
place, or rather became Christ himself. Finally, the godless nature got
so far out of hand that even the monk\'s habit was ascribed the power to
make blessed. This was followed by the godless devotion of the saints,
who worshipped St. George, St. Anne and others whom they did not know
were in heaven. This is a more than Egyptian darkness, into which reason
falls when it has once deviated from the right path of faith and from
the word of God. Therefore, we should fear God and call upon Him to keep
us by His word, and rather make us poor and let us fall into
tribulation, only that we do not fall away from His word. If we lose
this, we fall into all kinds of error, as the devil would have it. But
this should be inculcated in the sermons in order to instill fear in the
secure souls.

**That they break.**

\(26\) They shall be broken in two ways, both in body and soul. The
breaking of the heart is that in all their doings they have more and
more a troubled conscience. Now the more they fall on their
righteousness, the farther they are from certainty and joyfulness
*(πληροφορία)*. The

The breaking of the body is that, although they have an abundance of
wealth, they still have the-

346 **IL. xxn, 257-259. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
539-542.** 347

They do not enjoy the same things, but rather wear themselves out with
much fasting and watchfulness, and without any cause deprive themselves
of the use of God\'s creatures, as Paul Col. 2:23 says: \"Who do not
give glory to the flesh for its need. Instead, they think that holiness
consists in a dirty dress and a strict way of life. But God has given
the use of creatures to be enjoyed, as the 145th Psalm, v. 16, says:
\"You open Your hand and fill everything that lives with delight,\" that
is, \"with full delight, so that one may have pleasure in it. For it
does not displease God that the body should have its need. He only
forbids sinful pleasure, but not the use of the creature.

\(27\) This is a misery above all misery, that ungodliness and
superstition are deprived of both things. From within, the benefits of
grace and a happy conscience; but from without, the use of creatures and
the kindness of the benevolent Creator. Thus, even today, the Jews live
very badly on the outside, and they have no peace on the inside either.
Thus, the spirits of the Jews have first fallen from the truth of the
sacrament of the altar, then also of baptism; and yet they still have no
peace in it. And at the same time they reintroduce the sad and austere
way of life in which they place the highest degree of holiness.

**That they become entangled.**

28.^z^ ) Like the birds on the glue rods of the birdmakers. But it is an
exceedingly wretched thing that, after they have fallen from one error
into another, there is no one to set them right again, but they have
some vain hopes and wretched promises, in which they are so entangled
that they cannot unwind themselves again. Do not despair, they say, for
you are on the path of truth; but that you are in such a bad way is due
to temptations by which you are being tested 2c. Thus the monks have
said: The more

z\) Instead of U 28 and 29, the 1532 edition contains Folgmdes: They
will become so entangled in error that they cannot be brought back to
the right path, just as the Jews are exceedingly stubborn.

obedience has of its own, the smaller it is. Again, the smaller he is in
and of himself, the greater he is. By such enticements the poor souls
are entangled, so that they persist in such brokenness.

\(29\) And this is the reason why the wicked will not be reformed.
Because they interpret the punishment as a cross, and the good deed as a
merit. Such a very tender bird\'s glue and soft rope to catch the
foolish has been the well-known and very ungodly saying of Thomas, that
the observance of the rules of the order and the monastic life is a
second baptism. Thus, the monks who were caught by this opinion were
nothing but Anabaptists.

**That they are caught.**

\(30\) That they, thus ensnared, may be imprisoned for obedience to the
devil. The scoffers of the divine word have to wait for this punishment.

V. 14. **Hear therefore the word of the Lord.**

He will warn them beforehand so that they will not be ensnared and
perish. But there is an emphasis in the names he gives them. He calls
them \"scoffers\" because they arrogantly despise the word of God and
God Himself with His wisdom and justice. But they do this out of
presumption and certainty. But he calls them \"rulers\" to indicate that
they exercise tyranny over the people with the law and the statutes of
men.

V. 15 **For you say, \"We have made a covenant with death.**

This is a description of the certainty that always accompanies
godlessness. The reason of this certainty is the highest stubbornness,
which we see today both in the Jews and in the Papists. For if they did
not imagine that they would be safe from death and hell, they would not
defend their own so stubbornly. But everything is to be taken in
imitation, in the person of the godless, who say: We are safe from all
danger 2c.

33 Thus we see that the monks walk and talk confidently in this opinion:
If I keep my rule, it is impossible that

[348 **259-262.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 28, 15. 16.
**w.** vi, **542-544.** 349]{.underline}

I will be lost. For every ungodly man is good to his sect. Therefore,
those who are the most holy sometimes mistrust their merits and works,
but they never mistrust their way of life and rule, but certainly
promise themselves eternal life, and do not look at all, neither to
Christ, nor to faith, nor to love. What is this but to say with the
surest heart, \"We have made a covenant with death\"? In this way, even
the secure Jews base themselves on the statutes of their ancestors.

**For we have made lies our refuge.**

The prophet and the Holy Spirit call the child by his right rain
(scapham, scapham), that is, the lie is the refuge of the wicked. But
the wicked hold that these are not lies, but the strongest rocks and
mountains. Thus, the subordinate clause (minor) of the theological
conclusion (syllogismi) always remains the real point (χμι- *νόμενο\"),*
about which one argues, since one agrees because of the upper clause (de
majore). For on both sides we set this upper clause: the heretics shall
be damned. But because of the subordinate clause the dispute arises that
we say: you are heretics; \"you have made falsehood your hope 2c.
Therefore, we must stand firm here in the judgment of Scripture. For
those truly put their hope in falsehood, who invent for themselves the
idol of their own righteousness, and take some certain works on which
they may rely in the judgment of God.

**V. 16. Behold, I lay a foundation in Zion.**

35 Before he threatens the godless despisers with their destruction, he
comforts and strengthens the pious. He says: I will send Christ, who
will be a cornerstone, whose righteousness and merit alone will be
valid. Others who rely on their own righteousness and not on this
cornerstone shall be damned and perish. ^a^) But since the prophet says:
\"I am laying a foundation stone\", I will

a\) In the edition of 1532 is inserted here: Christ is the foundation
and head of the church, who holds the whole building.

At the same time, he indicates that consciences will be sure and certain
that they are justified by the righteousness of this stone, so that it
will instruct us in the certainty of faith that we are completely
certain and have an unmistakable foundation. But at the same time he
indicates that this foundation stone will be built upon, that the
foundation stone will not be laid as idle and in vain, but will be
prepared to be built upon. As if he wanted to say: I will make Christ
the head of the church, which will be fruitful; many will gather to him
and believe in him. He himself will carry the whole building that will
be built on it.

**A proven stone.**

\(36\) I would rather translate it \"hasty trying stone\" (\[lapidem\]
probatorem), so that it would be understood that Christ is such a stone,
after whose form all others are to be tested, so that we also may be
made like Him through the cross; as it says in Rom. 8:29. For this is to
be truly proved, if one endures in the cross, before which the world has
an abhorrence. Therefore we all want to have the stone, but we do not
want it as a touchstone. We do not want to be polished, to be cleansed
from avarice, envy, trust in our own righteousness, and the rest of our
faults. This opinion is far more emphatic than reading, \"a tried
(probatum) stone,\" though the other opinion is also true, as it is said
in the second chapter \[v. 18.\] and in the fourth \[v. 15.\] of the
epistle to the Hebrews, \"We have such a high priest, who is tempted in
every way. \"2c.

**A cornerstone.**

37 Paul explains this clearly in the second chapter to the Ephesians, v.
20 ff. and to the Colossians Cap. 2, 7. 2, 7. For it includes at the
same time the profession of the Gentiles. For Christ has joined two
walls together \[Eph. 2, 14.), and made Jews and Gentiles into one
church.

**A delicious cornerstone.**

38\) In the world Christ is despised, but in the hearts of believers he
is the most chosen stone, which is the most precious thing that the
godly have.

35014 . XXII, 262-264. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 544-547,
351

**Who is well founded** (**In fundamento fundatum**).

39\. who is so firm that he stands firm against the gates of hell and
against all the threats of all enemies. Therefore, he who believes in
Christ has a foundation that will not be moved for eternity. Therefore
he is safe and fears nothing, no matter how great the dangers may be,
because of this cornerstone, which is well founded. This is a great
comfort, that we know that he who believes has such a foundation that
cannot be overturned by any force of the world.

**He who believes does not flee.**

40 He describes the power of faith in comparison with the ungodly. An
evil conscience, as it is with unbelievers, flies, and. cannot stand
still, but flies before the least terror, and before a rushing leaf, and
if it could break through the walls, it would do so, as is witnessed by
the speech of the ungodly, which Christ adduces \[Luc. 23, 30.\], \"Fall
upon us, ye mountains!\" 2c. But he who bases himself on this stone
\"does not flinch,\" he does not tremble, he does not run away, but
remains standing. For he knows that Christ is Lord over death, and over
life, and over sin 2c. This is the power of faith, which is based on
Christ, not on us; therefore he does not let us fall, but sustains us in
all dangers.

\(41\) On the other hand, those who rely on works cannot stand even in
the lightest of evils. Thus he who believes condemns all works by the
word, because they cannot establish the conscience in the judgment of
God. For the words, \"He who believes,\" are to be taken exclusively to
exclude those who do not believe, as if to say, \"He who deals in works
is a slave.

V. 17. **And I will make justice the guide.**

\(42\) This is a threat against the wicked who reject this stone. I will
judge, he says, but with moderation; I will not destroy the wicked with
the holy without distinction. But the measure and the guide of my
judgment will be this cornerstone, Chri

stus. Those who do not believe in this I will destroy; the rest I will
preserve. This is how the righteousness of faith alone exists and is
preserved.

**Thus, the hail will drive away the false refuge.**

\(43\) These are excellent exhortations, by which we are deterred from
trusting in our own righteousness. For what good is it for a man to toil
for twenty years in fasting, vigils and other labors for the sake of
righteousness, as I did in the monastery? For if one binds all the toil
and all these works into one bundle, they will help nothing toward
blessedness, but \"the hail will drive them away.\" But only the trust
in mercy out of grace for nothing will remain immovable. Thus he
destroys here from the foundation all monasteries and all works, since
he ascribes to faith alone that it will stand still. But the flesh does
not believe this, except in temptations and danger; but then it
despairs.

**V. 18 And when a flood comes along.**

44\. he magnifies calamity, whether he may persuade them, and draw them
away from presumption to their own righteousness. He says: Misfortune
may come from wherever it wants, but it will overtake you unawares,
because you are not founded on the cornerstone 2c. These are threatening
promises, which seem to be impossible to the wicked, when they are well,
therefore they do not allow themselves to be reformed, as we see today
with the papists; they think it is not possible that they should fall.
But where was their bravery in the revolt of the peasants? There was not
a single priest or monk, not a single bishop, powerful as he was, who
had a shred of heart. None of them prayed at that time, no one believed,
no one dared to punish the people for the public sin of sedition, but
they were fearful and offered to do whatever the peasants ordered them
to do. Thus, a minor uprising put an end to their otherwise insolent
courage. We have experienced and seen that. Nowadays, they are insolent
again, because they have no other reason to be so.

352k ). xm, **264-267.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 28, 18-20.
**W. VI, 547-sso.** 353

are in danger. But when a challenge will come upon them, we will again
experience what the prophet threatens here: \"When a flood comes, it
will tread them down and take them away.\"

45 But we are to learn that a Christian must be most valiant in danger,
and when the cause seems lost. For fools, when they have arms and power,
are bold and brave; but when this protection is lost, they despair.
Christians, however, are commanded to be steadfast and hopeful in
danger, but to fear and not exalt themselves when all is well.

**V. 19: If it comes in the morning, it comes in the morning.**

46 He means that you must always be exposed to misfortune, and yet never
be aware of it, no matter when it comes. \"In the morning\" can be taken
according to a common image for quickly, so that \"in the morning\"
means as much as before you expect it. So also I take the figurative
speech \"of the day,\" that is, at a time when everything is going well;
and \"of the night,\" at an inopportune time. The cause is this, because
the righteousness of our flesh, when it judges, cannot suffer God; for
it is not sufficient in the sight of God.

47\. Those who anxiously toil with their works cause themselves much
trouble, for they can hardly be brought back to grace. But in dealing
with works, the soul or conscience does nothing but practice distrust of
God, and the more it strives, the stronger habitum (habit) it acquires
in distrust of God and trust in its own works. A whore, however, never
does this. Because she lives in public shameful deeds, she always has a
heart wounded by her sins. She also has no merits or good works to rely
on. But she is saved even more easily than any saint, as Christ also
says \[Matth. 21, 31.\], because the latter is prevented by his works
from having any desire for grace. Therefore, I believe the German saying
to be true, that more souls go to heaven from the gallows than from the
churchyard. For those

have not been so exercised as to put distrust in the goodness of Christ.

\(48\) Therefore, we must first and foremost strive to learn to trust in
the goodness of God, which He has shown us in Christ, His Son, whom He
gave to death for our sins. Otherwise, a habit and inclination to
mistrust God will develop, which will subsequently be insurmountable.
Therefore, one must always insist on the doctrine of faith, and make a
distinction between works and faith, that in works only the glory of God
and the benefit of the brethren, and nothing else is to be considered.
For otherwise it will happen that chastening will find us completely
unprepared. It is faith alone, however, that keeps us straight and
upright in judgment.

**For only the challenge teaches to remember the word (Vexatio dat
intellectum).**

As long as people enjoy peace and security, they despise and neglect the
word. But when the challenge comes, they only believe that what they
were reminded of before by the word is true. Thus, even the godly do not
feel the power and fruit of the word, except in temptation.

**V. 20. For the bed is so narrow.**

According to the German proverb, \"One must stretch oneself, after which
the ceiling is. The bed cannot occupy more than one. Jerome\'s opinion
appeals to me, but it is faded, in that he draws it to the marriage
state, and understands from an adulteress, who should not accept the
adulterer, that the opinion is this: Christ is the bridegroom, who wants
to have confidence in his mercy. He cannot suffer the adulterer, that
is, trust in my own works and in my righteousness. Therefore, one must
necessarily give way to the other. For the conscience is narrow, and
both cannot lie with each other at the same time. The ceiling cannot
hold both Christ and free will. One of the two must necessarily freeze
and fall out of bed. I approve of this opinion of Jerome, but it seems a
little too far from the text.

354 L. xxn, 267-269. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. SS0-5S3.
355

to go away. Because the prophet is talking here about hearing the word
and about the profession.

Therefore, I understand it, \"the bed is \[so narrow, and the cover so\]
short\": Therefore, the hearing of the word wants to be either alone, or
not there at all. Therefore you have to pull your thighs and feet
together, so that you can be in bed and covered. But the bed is the very
affliction and cross that draws the limbs together so that they do not
freeze; it does not let us wander about in peace and security, whereby
we fall from the faith. Furthermore, I like this opinion because it fits
with what precedes and follows. For he spoke of the punishment of the
ungodly. Now the godly also suffer tribulation. But this is the
difference, that the godly are kept in faith and word through the
tribulations, so that they do not stray into their doings. The wicked do
not. Therefore the opinion is: The tribulation or the cross is just like
a short bed, in which one must pull the body together, if one does not
want to freeze; that is, one must remain only with the hearing of the
word and follow it. Affliction, however, keeps us in a short bed, as it
were, and does not allow us to digress into our doings.

**V. 21 For the LORD will make himself known, as in mount Prazim.**

He continues with threats. The Lord is forced to hold court because you
do not believe. His actual office is to do good and to preserve. ^b^)
But our flesh is such a mischief that it abuses the whole creature and
the goodness of God. Therefore, God is compelled to make us blessed
through foolishness, since we abuse His wisdom and goodness, according
to which He gives peace, happiness, progress and all good things.
Therefore he is compelled to make the bed more narrow, that he may
preserve us by punishments and inflictions of evils. Thus he sent Christ
and the word of salvation to his people. That was his real work. But
because they are his

b\) From here to the end of the paragraph, the 1532 edition has only the
following: But if we abuse his benefits, he is compelled to keep us in
check by punishments. Thus he does 2c.

word mocked, he sent such people who were weary, foolish and poor, who
felt the narrowness of the bed. The others, who wanted to stay in their
vastness, he left. Thus he does a foreign work, punishes and condemns,
so that the others are preserved. Thus we see that the Jews are cast
out, and we Gentiles are accepted.

53\) \"Mount Prazim\" is called a mountain of division or separation,
because David divided his enemies there, 1) 1 Chron. 15, 11. Thus the
church is a mountain of division, where Jesus Christ stands. But the
Jews are repelled by him, therefore they separate themselves from the
church. But Christ is compelled to do this strange work, that he might
condemn the righteousness of the law, lest the righteousness of the
Gentiles, that is, the righteousness of faith without works of the law,
should be destroyed.

Thus we read of the Valley of Gideon in the Book of Joshua \[Cap. 10,
10. ff.\], where the enemies were struck by hail and thunderstorms from
heaven. This hail is the gospel, which punishes the world for sin, and
announces judgment and eternal death to those who do not believe in this
stone 2c.

55\) Furthermore, it should be noted here that the word, which is
otherwise a word of salvation and life, is to them a hail and a word of
destruction and death, not through the fault of the word, but because of
the faithlessness of the wicked, since it is not sent by God that we
should perish, but that we should believe and be saved. Therefore, this
word \[\"that he might do his work in another way\"\] has a secret
apology of Christ in it. As if the prophet wanted to say: It is not your
work that these people are killed, and the word is not the cause of it.
Why

1\) We think that the scribe erred in the words: \^uod ibi David
dir6inxtu8 68t a 8uis kostivus, and that it should be read: quod ibi
David dirsrnit dostss 8UO8 sweil David dort seine Feinde zertrenntes.
For also in the parallel passage 2 Sam. 5, 20. it reads in the Latin
translation attributed to Luther: V6nit erZo David in Dual Dra\^irn, st
p6reu88it 608 ivi 6t dixit: DiviM Dorninus inirnivos insos eorarn rn6
6to. (Walch, old ed., vol. XIV, 511), almost identical with the Vulgate
and our German Bible.

**356 L. XXII, 269-271.** brevity interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 28,
21-23. **W. VI, 553-556. 357**

Are then most of them corrupted by the word? I do not do this, he says;
my true office is to make blessed and alive. But I am compelled to do
this separate work also, for I cannot preserve or enlighten my own
unless those blinded ones perish who want to rely on their
righteousness. Because I have come to justify my own through true
righteousness, which is obtained through faith in my death, I am forced
to condemn the righteousness that comes from my own works. However, this
is not my own work, but someone else\'s. But this passage contains a
very rich consolation, that Christ is nothing other than a beatific
agent 2c.

**V.** 22. **So stop your mocking.**

\(56\) Do not take the gospel and the word for a fairy tale; otherwise
your bonds will become even stronger and you will be entangled in
greater error, so that you will become unfit for all good works \[Titus
1:16\], just as the one who is bound is unfit for all works. For he
threatens them with extreme blindness if they do not repent.

**For I have a spoilage and taxes 2c. (Consummationem et abbreviationem
etc.)**

57 He wants to persuade the wicked to accept the gospel by threats,
because of which the destruction seems to be a total destruction, so
small is the number of believers. The Lord, he says, has determined a
total destruction, which, however, will be cut short in order to
preserve the remnant of the godly.

V. 23 **Take heed and hear my voice.**

The whole of the following text is a consolation for those who would see
this destruction of the people. This consolation was necessary because
of the miserable appearance of the perishing people, who alone had the
name of the people of God in the whole world. For since the destruction
of the Jewish people was at the door, it seemed to the apostles as if
the whole nation had perished.

should be derbated. Therefore, in three chapters of the Epistle to the
Romans, namely in the 9th, 10th and 11th chapters, Paul takes great
pains to resolve this point. For it was certain that this people was
God\'s people, to whom all the promises of Christ, of the Church, of the
Kingdom of God 2c. belonged. Moreover, it had a worship service that was
instituted by God Himself and other things that Paul mentions in Rom. 9,
4. 5. But now it was an exceedingly great distress that this people
should be rejected, and in their place the Gentiles should be accepted,
who lived without law and without all righteousness. And indeed, if Paul
and the apostles had not resolved this point, we would not have been
able to resolve it. For this case of the people seems to go against all
the promises of God, so that reason cannot conclude otherwise than that
either Christ did not come, or that God is a liar; both of which are
blasphemous and quite wrong.

\(59\) When the prophet wants to treat this lesson, he first calls the
attention of the listeners, then he answers: although God causes
destruction, he has not rejected his people. In the same way Paul also
answers \[Rom. 11, 1. f.\]: \"God has not cast off His people,\" he
says, \"for I am also an Israelite.\" This is a marvelous conclusion
before reason: I, with a few, am not cast out, consequently the whole
people is not cast out either.

But the present form of the church also teaches us that we must believe
that this conclusion, although weak before reason, is nevertheless
consistent and true. For the papists today also attack us on this ground
of proof. Because they are in office and have the administration of the
sacraments, they want to be the church. This is their strongest argument
against us, in which the flesh is completely drowned. Do you think, they
say, that you few people are the church, since we, who are so many, so
great, so powerful, sit in office? So now we answer simply, as Paul
answered the Jews: Ye may be much or great; if ye believe not on Christ,
and put your trust in the righteousness of Christ, we care not. For it
is not because of this that you are

358 IL. XXII, 271-274. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, S56-SSS.
359

the church, because you are in the church office. For it is written that
the abomination may stand in the holy place, and that the Antichrist
shall sit in the temple of God. Therefore, the church is tested
according to your faith in Christ, and not according to the office or
the crowd. This test is the touchstone and the most certain rule 2c.

61 Since the prophet wants to explain how the Lord will destroy and
control, he uses a very beautiful parable. A plowed field seems to be
desolate in appearance. This is the destruction, that he rejects the
synagogue and calls the Gentiles. But now the field is not desolated,
but prepared, so that the fruits grow the better. In this way the people
are destroyed, that the rest may be saved, not that the whole people may
be destroyed, as it seems from the appearance. The grass of the field,
that is, the righteousness of works, which was in that people, is cut
down by the gospel, that is, condemned, and said to be unrighteousness,
that the true and perfect righteousness, which is faith in Christ, may
grow the more abundantly 2c.

V. 24, 25: Does **a husbandman plow his field for seed forever?**

The plowing is not done because the husbandman wanted nothing else than
to plow all the time, but it is done so that one can sow. And this is
\"the control\" of the plowing. Otherwise there would be nothing but
ruin and desolation. In this way the Lord will plow when he rejects the
majority of the people, so that the grass that was in the field before,
that is, the righteousness of works, will be uprooted. For the gospel
turns back all this pasture, and condemns it as unrighteousness. But he
cuts them off for this reason, and condemns them, that a new nation may
be sown, and a new righteousness come forth. For the various kinds of
seed sown in different places are the various gifts, and the various
fruits.

\(63\) Therefore, one must learn this way, that God, if He wants to
increase, must first destroy.

tears and devastates. For so he does another\'s work, that he may do his
work. He does the same thing to each one of us in particular. For God
crucifies our flesh with the plow, that is, with the cross, through the
preaching of the law, through contrition, through terror of conscience
and death. The flesh feels this destruction and judges that it will be
an everlasting destruction. Taxes, however, can grasp it most severely,
because then, when it is thus torn with the plow, God wants to prepare
it to accept the righteousness of Christ through faith, upon which
various fruits of love and good works, finally also blessedness and
eternal life shall follow. \[Although at the time of the cross there is
hardly a spark of faith left, the heart must nevertheless be raised by
such scriptural passages, so that it is said: the Lord will certainly do
a tax, the suffering will not be perpetual.

**V. 26. So also their God chastises them.**

This is the final purpose of the destruction. That the people may be
instructed in righteousness, not that they may perish completely.

**And teach them.**

Their God will do it, and no one else. If he did not plow and cut in
this way, he would sow in vain. That is why he now cuts and tears, so
that the seed may come forth. That is why he discards most of the
people, so that the rest and the multitude of the Gentiles may be
brought in. Each one must learn this for himself in particular, that we
accept prison, the cross and other evils as a reason for life, freedom
and glory. Thus, when a godly man is buried, it seems to be a rending;
but there is nothing less in view than that the body should rise
incorruptible and in glory, and yet it will happen. It is quite
different with human righteousness and hypocrisy; it grows and grows
after the first appearance; finally it becomes disgraceful and perishes.
Therefore the Lord instructs by right, that is,

360 **L. XXII, 274-276.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 28,
26-29. **W. VI, PP59-563.** 361

he plows, he kills, he condemns, that he may teach, that is, that he may
sow seed, vetches, wheat, and each according to its order, and according
to the measure according to which the spirit of faith is measured out.

**V. 27. 28. For the vetches are not threshed with harrows.**

This simile is somewhat obscure because of the way of threshing, which
is unknown to us. The meaning, however, is easy. With the threshing it
is intended that one gets bread, not that the grains are trampled. This
is how God seeks the blessedness of the others when he sends destruction
upon the wicked. As if he wanted to say: Pay attention to the threshing.
If I were a sheaf of wheat lying on the threshing floor, and my lord
came and had me trampled by the hooves of the oxen, and destroyed by the
harrows and the wheels of the wagons, then I would despair. This is the
destruction that seems to be without taxes. So he consoles me, saying,
\"The purpose of threshing is not to destroy the grain, although it may
seem so, but to gather the grain and keep it in the threshing floor,
while the chaff is burned.

67 Therefore trampling is to be distinguished from threshing, and
destruction from taxation. For when he condemns the people with his
justice, saying, Ye are all guilty of eternal death; this is threshing.
But in our eyes it seems to be utter ruin. Against these thoughts he
comforts us. He saith, All the people shall not perish; neither shalt
thou perish. \"Only the chaff shall perish.\" Only the chaff will
perish; but you cast be kept on the threshing floor 2c. So every
thresher is an image of God when he chastises. But the grain is an image
of you, who cast chastened. Now learn from this similitude in which
spirit God chastises you.

According to his works he seems to hate you, but according to his
attitude he loves you exceedingly. For by the condemnation of our
righteousness, and by the tribulations, we are prepared to become
acceptable food to God, as by threshing one seeks bread, and not the
spoilage of barley.

68 These are excellent consolations in the cross, which strike the heart
all the more because they are so clear and known to all. Without a
doubt, Paul was very concerned about this passage, because he himself
had no small effort to clear the way for the rejection of the synagogue.
And the saints could not have raised themselves up in any other way than
by these consolations of the prophet that this rejection would take
place in order to separate the chaff from the wheat, so that the ungodly
would perish, but the godly would be rescued.

**V. 29. This is also done by the LORD of hosts.**

This is a wonderful and immeasurable wisdom, which reason never reaches,
because God deals with us in such a way that He seems to hate us
according to the work, but loves us most fervently according to the will
2c. In Hebrew, the meaning differs a little from the Latin translation.
\[Thus, according to the Hebrew, it says: \"The Lord has taken a
wonderful counsel, and has procured a happy outcome; so that the wise
counsel and the success are connected with each other. As if to say: The
Lord is wonderful in his counsels, by which he condemns our works and
our righteousness. But he condemns them in such a way that it has a
happy outcome, that in this way it comes to the making 1) of bread, and
not to total destruction, as it has the appearance.

1\) We have followed the reading of the Wittenberg edition: aä
taetioLsru. The Jena and Erlangen editions offer: kraetiousiu.

[362 L. XXII, 276-278. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 563-S66,
363]{.underline}

**The twenty-ninth chapter.**

**V. 1. Woe to Ariel, Ariel!**

Just as he described the taxation at the end of the previous chapter and
comforted the godly, so he describes here the complete destruction and
threatens the godless with the sword of the Romans, just like Christ in
the 24th chapter of Matthew, who also seems to have taken some words
from this. However, at the end he returns to the promise of the Gospel.

\(2\) But he calls Jerusalem \"Ariel,\" that is, a lion of God, and
\"the camp of David,\" to indicate their presumption. For therefore they
were secure, and despised the threats of the prophets, because the
kingdom was promised to David and his seed, and because their temporal
government and priesthood were instituted by God. But the promises of
God shall fall to those who are of a broken heart, not to the hopeful in
whom God has an abomination.

**You hold seasons.**

3.^c^ ) The most prominent cause of the Jews\' presumption was this,
that they kept feasts, and daily services, new moons and seasons
appointed by God. Under this pretext they were puffed up against the
gospel. That is why the prophet ridiculed them. Well,\" he says,
\"continue bravely with sacrifices! It will happen that you will perish
together with your sacrifices. Thus he abolishes the whole law and all
the practices of the law in which the Jews put their trust.

**V. 2. and shall be a right Ariel unto me.**

This is a right lion of God, against whom I will argue through the
Romans. Before, he set it active, a lion of God who overcomes by God;
but now he sets it passive, who has been overcome by God.

c\) Instead of § 3, the 1532 edition says: Your annual sacrifices will
not help you. For he abolishes the whole Mosaic service.

that is. As if he wanted to say: Because my Ariel, and my saints and
devotees do not want to believe the preaching of the gospel, but fear
the apostles and my servants, I will again make them afraid and sad. But
he looks at the contrast: Now they are bold, insolent and presumptuous;
but then they will be full of sorrow, and will be destroyed.

This can also be applied to our times. The pabst with his appendage is
Ariel. He has a proud name. He does not call himself a sheep of God, but
a lion, because he has a lion\'s strength, and possesses the kingdoms of
the world along with his own. Therefore he believes that he wants to
break through, because he carries the name of the church, with which he
is hopeful against God and Christ, and misses that he is insurmountable,
while he is possessed by devilish and not by divine power together with
his own. Therefore he says: You will be my Ariel, in a suffering way,
whom God will fear, tear and destroy. This will certainly happen,
according to the prophecies of Daniel, and **the** revelation of St.
John.

**V. 3. 4. You shall speak out of the earth.**

6.^d^ ) This is a description of the distress that was to follow the
destruction of the city and that still continues among the Jews today.
As if he wanted to say: You boast now as if your voices were God\'s
voices; you speak as if God had commanded you; but it will happen that
this priesthood, which has raised its mouth to heaven, will hardly
murmur unpleasantly from the earth, that is, that the divine power to
teach will be changed into an earthly one, and after the word of God is
taken from them, they will be plagued with human statutes.

7 But this is an important text. For so it goes with all who hear the
word of the

d\) Instead of §§ 6-8, the 1532 edition has the following: The word of
God shall be taken away, that thou teach nothing but statutes of men.
This is what we obviously see in the Jews today, that they only murmur
in the corners.

364 **L. XXII, 278-281.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 29, 3-8.
**W. VI, S66-S69.** 365

If they do not want to accept the truth, they will later, as punishment
for their contempt of the Word, accept lies and human statutes, which
are truly earthly teachings. Thus, even today we see the Jews toiling
away with very miserable and petty works, which are nothing but
inventions and statutes of men. This is the deserved punishment that
follows the contempt of the Word.

**That your voice be like a magician\'s.**

8\. it is exactly what he said above \[Cap. 28, 11 sf: Ye shall be
deprived of the word, and shall teach according to that which the belly,
as your teacher, shall bring in unto you, even according to carnal
doctrine. For this is a general rule, that those who have once forsaken
the Word, thereafter all follow that which human reason prescribes.
\"Sorcerers\" he calls those who speak out of their heads. Even today
the Jews are like this, deprived of the teaching authority. The gospel,
however, is publicly proclaimed, while they murmur carnal, foolish and
vain doctrines in corners. This very severe punishment, which we still
see today in the wretched Jews, should remind us to act the word with
greater care and diligence.

**V. 5. And the multitude that scatter thee shall be as a thin dust.**

9\. your enemies will be like the sand of the sea.

**And that is suddenly to happen soon.**

10\. when they will say: It is peace, and are in the midst of the
flowering of their presumption, then shall the Romans break in. For
because the wicked believeth not, therefore all calamities suddenly
overtake him. For the wicked is always full of hope in the promises, and
without fear of calamity. Therefore, it cannot happen other than that
misfortune finds him unprepared and so corrupts him.

**V. 6 For you will be visited by the LORD of hosts.**

This is a summa, as it were. You will be showered with all kinds of
storms and misfortunes.

**V. 7. But like a night vision in a dream.**

\(12\) He also threatens the Romans that they will perish because they
are not moderate in their anger, but also rage against Zion, that is,
the godly. They will perish, he says, like a dream. But this is a
comfort to the godly, to whom it seemed as if the Roman Empire would
last forever and rage against the church. He says, \"It will not last
forever, but will pass away like a dream. For just as parents, when they
have chastised their child, throw the rod into the fire, so God throws
away the wicked as a chastisement rod after he has used them, and
corrupts them.

**V. 8. for as a hungry man dreams.**

This is a parable full of consolation. The Romans and all the
adversaries of the church are hungry and thirsty. They thirst for the
blood of the godly, and make believe that they can overcome them, even
that they have already overcome them. But they only dream and perish
themselves.

14 Furthermore, this likeness also comforts us today against our
adversaries, who are hungry enemies and seek to devour us. But according
to the flesh, it appears that they really do so. For the flesh cannot
judge otherwise, seeing that blood is shed daily by the ungodly, that
many godly are killed daily. What else can the flesh conclude here but
that the enemies are watching, devouring and devouring the church? And
yet a Christian, against this outward appearance, should think that all
this power of the Romans is like a hungry and thirsty man who sleeps,
who thinks in his dreams that he eats and drinks; but in fact he does
not eat and drink, but hungers and thirsts. This is a good simile for
comfort. Thus the Romans, after they had shed the blood of an infinite
number of the martyrs, 1) thought they had destroyed the kingdom of
Christ. What was this opinion but an empty dream, since we see that
still up to these lines so-.

1\) Jenaer and Erlanger: Naduisssut; Wittenberger: tiunsisssnt.

366 L. XXII, 281-283. interpretations on the prophets. M. VI, S69-S72.
367

Christ and the Christians have remained, but the Roman Empire has
fallen.

\(15\) This must also be done against the pope and against all other
temptations. All the teeth of Satan, all the raging and all the efforts
of the papists, by which they seek to oppress us, are a dream in the
sight of God, with which they not only accomplish nothing, but are also
splendidly deceived. From the outward appearance it seems as if they
were devastating and tearing down; but it is only an empty imagination,
and a deceitful face, according to which they make themselves think more
that they are doing it than that they are really doing it. Thus they
think they want to devour the church. But what they do is not devouring,
but dreaming of devouring. They will know this one day when they wake
up, either at the hour of death, or at the time of the visitation, or at
the last day. So you will see after ten years that the princes and
bishops, who are now raging so much against the word of God, will be
destroyed, but the gospel and the confessors of the gospel will have
remained unharmed.

16 Thus it was thought of Muenzer before the world, when he went along
thinking that he wanted to suppress the pope and the Lutherans at the
same time, so that he alone would rule, that his teaching alone would be
praised, that he would put this into practice. But the outcome has shown
that he did all this in a dream, not waking but sleeping. Thus the
Sacramentans and Anabaptists have visions and dream in their sleep; they
do not see the true word, the true kingdom of Christ. But they imagine
that the pope will perish at the same time as Luther, but that their
doctrine will remain, and that Germany, France, Italy, and the whole
world in general will accept it with great applause. This is a dream in
which they make believe that they eat and drink. But what will happen?
When they awake, the sacraments will remain whole and in their value,
just as they have remained since the time of the apostles; but they will
perish.

\(17\) It is an excellent similitude. For imagine a man who is asleep,
how great is the power of deception then. For he who lies in a deep
sleep cannot

realize that he is being deceived by the dream. He thinks that the thing
really happened. Therefore, when he dreams that he has found a treasure,
he rejoices over it, and is glad, as over a thing that has happened in
earnest, and he cannot get beyond these dream images, but judges that
the thing he has seen is true. So it is with everyone who is deceived by
any opinion of the flesh; just as all heretics who are deceived by
images which they see, as it were, in dreams, cannot think otherwise
than that they have the most constant truth. Therefore Jude in his
epistle \[v. 8.\] baptizes them with a very appropriate name, calling
those dreamers who follow carnal wisdom. For however wise they are
according to the world and according to reason, yet in divine things and
in the matter of religion they are nothing but dreamers, who can make no
distinction between an empty imagination and a true thing, between a
dream and a real thing, but say according to these their empty dream
images: Bread and wine are not the body. This is a certain thing and the
truth itself, as they wrote, but that it is nothing but a dream, they do
not see.

\(18\) Thus this parable contains a general consolation for all those
who are in tribulation, and it pictures our adversaries that they will
pass away in a short time, like a dream, and that they will wear
themselves out with such suggestions, which are nothing but
imaginations. For in thinking that they devour and swallow, they
themselves are devoured and swallowed. But this must be taken in the
spirit. For after the outward appearance the opposite is before the
eyes.

V. 9. solidified.

19 Here is a new lesson about the blindness and desolation of the Jews,
that they become so hardened that they rage against Christ to the point
of frenzy. It seems that Paul had drawn this passage from the last
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. He uses frightening words. First,
\"hardened,\" as if you were \"stunned,\" so that it seems as if deaf
people are being told a fairy tale when Christ is preached to you.
Secondly:

368 **L-** xxn. **283-288.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 29,
9-43. **W. VI, 57L-575.** 369

\"Be blinded,\" that you may not see with hatred and malice. Third,
become drunk, that is, completely drowned in your opinions and actions.
Fourth: \"Stagger,\" that is, teach inconstant things that cannot make
conscience certain.

\(20\) Here someone might ask: Why does he command such things? I
answer: It is not a commandment, but a bitter permission, and as it were
an imprecation, which comes from the displeasure of the heart. Since you
do not want to accept the word, go on as blind men in your actions 2c.

**V. 10. For the Lord has given you a spirit of hard sleep.**

21 He says, \"The Lord has poured into you\"; not that the Lord Himself
teaches in such a way, but He allows it to happen when He withdraws His
Spirit, which they would not accept. So also he says, \"He hath closed
your eyes.\" For when the light (which they reject) is taken away,
darkness must remain. So that it may be understood, God does not blind
by effect \[evil\] (effective), but by taking away \[good\] (privative).

**Your prophets and princes.**

22 These are terrifying threats that neither in the secular government
nor in the priesthood is there anyone who is not involved in errors and
lies.

23 Likewise, as we see, it is the same today. For the Lord has given
them a spirit of hard sleep, so that, say what you will against them, it
is said as to stones and wood. The best bishops and theologians among
them have drowned in error. These are followed by the princes, the
nobility and the rabble, and they are all blind. But by this passage the
ground of proof is dissolved, on which they lean most, reproaching us:
Thinkest thou then that so many popes, bishops, and princes err, and
that thou alone knowest the truth? The Prophet answers: Yes, they all
err, because GOD has poured into them a spirit of deceit. For He does
not look at the multitude, or the strength, or the wisdom of men.

V. 11, 12. **That also all (prophets) will be visions.**

\(24\) All the visions, that is, the prophecy, of which ye boast, shall
be as a sealed book; that is, by your ungodliness ye shall cause
yourselves to shut up all the holy scriptures; as we see in the Jews
today. Although they have the clearest scriptures about the future of
Christ, by which they must confess that Christ has come, and although
they see that a good part of the people in the whole world follow this
faith, they alone do not accept it and do not believe that he has come.
Thus the book remains closed to them, so that they cannot understand it.
Not that the fault lies with the holy scripture, that it is dark, but
with the readers, who bring blind eyes with them.

\(25\) What is clearer today than that Christ is our righteousness, and
not our works? and yet the adversaries fight most fiercely against this
doctrine. The fault is not in the doctrine, but in the eyes of those who
cannot and will not recognize it. For they have closed eyes, and snore,
and are frozen like the drunken, that they cannot see the revealed
truth. There is nothing brighter than the sun, and yet the blind see no
better, for the fault of their eyes. Christ also says, \"The light has
come into the world,\" but because of this the world does not see it,
because it loves darkness more than light \[John 3:19\]. Thus this
passage applies not only to the Jews, but also to our times, for our
consolation, and so that we may learn to treat your words of God with
greater reverence, lest we also be afflicted with such blindness. The
fact that there is no teacher in all universities today who could
correctly interpret a few chapters of Paul, a few Psalms, is due to
their eyes, not to the Scriptures. For they are deceived by dream images
2c.

V. 13. **Therefore this people draw near to me with their mouths.**

26\. because ye are hypocrites, I will cleave unto these your outward
works, and unto this

**370** n. XXII, 286-288. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
57S-578. **371**

Do not turn away from the appearance of holiness. You rather mock me
than revere me. Therefore I will mock you again.

27 But notice how much he attributes to the hypocrites that they draw
near to God. They have a zeal, and are earnestly intent on the service
of God. Likewise, they honor God. However, because the heart is without
faith, therefore he rejects and condemns their greatest service to God.

\(28\) So today the papacy wants to be closest to God, and we admit it,
as far as the ministry is concerned; yes, we also hear this from them,
that they teach that Christ suffered for us. If one looks here at the
lips and at the mouth, they teach quite the same as we do. But if I go
further, and thus conclude, If Christ suffered for us, why then will I
make myself blessed by my works? here they begin to depart from us, and
to show publicly that they teach only with their lips that Christ
suffered for us, but mean something else in their hearts. For if they
were truly of this opinion from the heart, they would not expect
righteousness from works.

29\. This passage thus serves us so that when they condemn us as
heretics and say that they are God\'s people, we can admit to them that
they are God\'s people and closest to God, but, as the prophet says
here, with the mouth and with the lips; for the rest, with the hearts
they are very far from God. This is to keep us from hypocrisy. For this
is how the wicked are wont to boast: God\'s word, God\'s word, God, God,
the church, the church 2c. With this pretense Satan deceives the unwary.
For since he cannot deceive otherwise than by the appearance of
godliness, therefore he also imitates the speeches and works of the
godly in his limbs, as the Germans say in Proverbs, \"In GOD\'S name all
calamity lifts itself up.\"

\(30\) But when the prophet says, \"They honor me,\" he speaks according
to the opinion of the wicked. For they do not honor the true God, but
the idol of their heart. For they make a strange opinion of GOD; as, a
monk who thinks that GOD looks at his robe and at his vows, but at the
ge

He does not see Christ crucified. But such a God is nowhere; therefore
he does not honor and serve God, but the idol of his heart, and his
opinion, which he has made of God without God\'s word. But this is the
true religion and the true service of God, that Mari knows that God is
such a God, who wants to make blessed in vain and by grace, for the sake
of Christ; but because the wicked use the name and the word of God
falsely, therefore he says that they honor him, but only with the tongue
2c.

**And fear me according to man\'s command.**

31\. Their fear of me comes from human commandments and human statutes.
Fearing God among the Hebrews is as much as honoring God (Deum colere)
among the Latins, and the fear of God is the same as worship or
godliness. Therefore he says: The service and the religion which they
practice against me has completely turned into human statutes. They
honor me and approach me in such a way that they prefer the teachings of
men to the words of God, and esteem the observations of the statutes of
men higher than those of the true service of God.

But it is a completely golden text for us. In the papacy they were
stricter about the commandments of men than about the ten commandments.
Fornication, adultery, death, and theft were sins, but there were whole
seas of indulgences in which these commandments were wiped out and
drowned. But if you either did not let yourself be blessed or did not
have a candle in the mass, these were such sins that could not be
forgiven, against which there was no indulgence. Thus, with them one has
the greatest patience with the contempt of the commandments of God, and
shows the greatest severity in observing their own commandments.

The same thing happened in the monasteries. Since in them pride, hatred,
idleness, lechery 2c. prevailed in the highest degree, they were
nevertheless considered the least sins. But going out of the cell 1)
without Schepler, transgressing the forty-day fast 2c., that was a sin
that could not be forgiven.

1\) Erlanger: \[sllam instead of: esUarn.

**372 L. XXII, 288-29\].** Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 29,
13-15. **W. VI, P78-58I. 373**

could be given. Thus the Jews killed Christ, who were full of unbelief,
pride and envy; but to go to Pilate Hans, likewise to eat with unwashed
hands, was the highest sin among them \[Matth. 15, 2\].

34\. But should not such things move God to anger and punishment? What
householder would endure such disobedience and mockery of his
commandment if he told his servant to prepare the table, and in the
meantime he would go idle and refrain from doing so, or take great pains
to prevent a spider from making its web, or otherwise undertake to do
something else? Would he not have the most just cause to be angry with
the servant and to give him blows, seeing that he not only omitted his
command but also mocked it, as if it were more important to remove the
spider\'s web than to prepare the table? And God should nevertheless
endure such negligence, disobedience and mockery from us, His creatures?
to whom He has done much good?

\(35\) Therefore, this passage teaches and comforts us against the
Pabstics, that we do not do as they do, but rather turn around and
esteem the commandments of God higher than the commandments of men, as
they esteem their statutes of men higher than the word of God. This is
what Paul said \[2 Thess. 2, 4.\], that the Antichrist exalts himself
above God and all worship; not that he ascends to heaven, but that he
rules over the consciences by his statutes, as we have learned. For the
terror of the pope was so great that even I would have been more
offended by a single word spoken against the pope than if someone had
spoken against all the commandments of God.

\(36\) As has already been shown above (7 ff.), it is always the case
that once one has departed from the word of God, one\'s heart soon falls
into the statutes of men. For there can be no middle road, but men are
governed either by truth or by imagination. Therefore, the godly honor
God in truth, but the godless honor God in appearance and according to
their delusion.

This delusion gives rise to various worship services, through which they
hope to please God.

This is by far the most serious and harmful thing, that the wicked are
more afraid of their false worship than the godly are of their true
worship. There, even the smallest things torment and frighten the
consciences, as those have experienced who have followed the monastic
life with seriousness. Therefore, this is the noblest fruit of ungodly
worship and of the statutes of men, that they give the consciences an
empty terror where there is nothing to fear; as the 53rd Psalm, v. 6,
says: \"There they fear, where there is nothing to fear.\" On the other
hand, where one should fear, in the transgression of the commandments of
God, there is the greatest carelessness and the greatest contempt. Thus,
through the statutes of men, one despises the true God, and on the other
hand has the highest reverence for his invented God.

V. 14. **That the wisdom of his wise men might perish.**

Wisdom\" is the knowledge of God and religion. \"Mind\" is the judgment
that we see what is at odds with religion and with divine service. If
one takes away these two pieces, what will remain but lies, falsities
and idolatries? as we see in the Pabstism, which is actually described
here. For they boast of their own wisdom, when in fact wisdom has been
taken away from them. They press upon us with the prestige of the
church. They honor God only with the tongue; but of faith and truth they
know nothing. Thus they also kill the flesh outwardly with fasting,
while this should be done with prayer and faith. Therefore, every
godless person is a fool when he is the wisest; and he is stupid when he
is the most understanding.

V. 15: **Woe to those who want to be hidden from the Lord.**

\(39\) Hitherto he has spoken of blindness and of the punishment of
ungodliness; now he adds this also, that they defend these errors and
lies. He says: \"They want to

374 L. XXII, 291-293. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, S81-S84.
375

be hidden, and speak: Who beholdeth us?\" For they think they want to be
safe under the appearance of religion and righteousness, even with God.

40\. This is also what our adversaries say today when we threaten them
with judgment: After the Lutheran GOtt I ask nothing, if he is also not
favorable to me. Therefore, this passage is a gloss on the words of the
14th Psalm, v. 1.: \"The wicked say in their heart, There is no GOt,\"
namely, whom the godly preach and teach; and on the words in the 10th
Psalm, v. 11.: \"GOt has forgotten, he has hidden his face, he will
never see it.\" This is the real title of the wicked, that where the
true God is, speaks, works, there, they say, he is not. On the other
hand, where they themselves speak and work, they say: Here is God. This
supreme impropriety moves the prophet to the terrifying exclamation:

**V. 16. 17. How are you so wrong?**

41 This is a severe punishment of the hypocrites, who are secure in the
confidence of their works. No work says to its master, \"You did not
make me,\" and you say this to me. So he threatens to take the kingdom
of God from them and give it to the Gentiles who bring forth its fruits,
Matth. 21, 43. And elsewhere \[Deut. 32, 21. 1: \"I will provoke them in
that which is not a people\" 2c.

42\. \"Lebanon,\" that is, Jerusalem, which has the priesthood and the
kingdom, which are like trees, shall become a field, and the field,^e^ )
that is, the Gentiles shall be accepted as God\'s people instead of the
Jews.

**V. 18 For at that time the deaf will hear.**

The kingdom of God and the preaching of the gospel is snatched from the
Jews and spread among the sinners, the Gentiles; the gospel is preached
to the poor, who recognize that they are blind and deaf 2c.

**V. 19. The poor among men will rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.**

\(44\) This is a very good saying, wherewith he takes pleasure in all
our works and in all our doings.

e\) The 1532 edition continues here like this: that is, the people of
the Gospel become a Lebanon.

For this reason we have peace and joy in Christ, because the peace that
is sought through us is weak, but the peace that is sought through
Christ is strong, as he himself says \[John 16:33\]: \"In me you have
peace, but in the world you are in fear. Now when we are pressed either
with sin, or with despair, or with some outward evil, let us look to
Christ, and comfort ourselves with the hope of the promises which he has
given to the godly. But no one does this but the afflicted, who
recognize their blindness and foolishness. Thus the prophet rejects in
one word all that in which men can put their trust apart from Christ,
but especially spiritual things.

**V. 20. When the tyrants have an end.**

When this happens, there will be an end to \"tyrants\" of consciences
everywhere, who weigh down consciences with the statutes of men. There
will also be an end to the godless despisers, and \"those who watch for
trouble,\" that is, the righteousness of works.

46 But with the word \"watch\" he emphasizes the zeal of the saints of
works. For the children of this world are much wiser and more ardent in
their pretensions than the godly are in theirs. Thus no teacher is so
diligent in sowing the truth as the heretics and originators of sects
are in spreading their errors. In the same way, in worldly matters, no
one is as diligent in his office as a miser is in collecting money. This
is a figurative expression, that he calls the righteousness of works
\"toil\" (iniquitatem); for it makes consciences sad, depressed, and
restless.

**V. 21: Who make people sin by preaching.**

\(47\) By treating the word of God ungodly and declaring it in an
ungodly way, they thereby fortify and defend their righteousness against
true righteousness. \"In the gate,\" that is, in public.

**376 L. XXII, 293-295.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 29,
21-24. **.W. VI, S84-587. 377**

The saints are not the only ones in the ministry. There is also an
emphasis in the word \"reproach,\" because they attach false accusations
to the saints, by which they seek to make their doctrine suspect among
the hearers, just as they call us heretics and rebels today, and kill
under this name, while, according to their own public testimony, both
are false.

**Departure by lies (frustra) from the righteous.**

\(48\) One must get used to such expressions of the Holy Spirit. For the
Holy Spirit calls him righteous whom the world calls a heretic.
Likewise, the Holy Spirit calls the teachings of the ungodly, which they
call the word of God and the holy doctrine of religion, spit. Therefore,
it is not only useful but also necessary to diligently search for and
treat such contradictions in the holy Scriptures.

\(49\) In the same way, the little word \"without cause\" (frustra) is
to be taken. For the wicked do not say that they hate us without a
cause, but they say that they have the greatest causes. Thus Christ says
Ps. 69:5, \"They hate me without a cause.\" Caiphas, however, did not
want to hate Him without a cause, but he had the greatest cause, namely
that the people should not believe in Him \[Joh. 11, 48.\]. But that
cause, which is the greatest in the sight of the world, is \"without
cause\" in the sight of God.

**V. 22. Dam says the Lord.**

50 When the ungodly teachers are so cast out that the freedom of the
gospel is heard everywhere, then the fruit of the word will follow. The
poor will rejoice and hope in the Lord. But he does not add in vain,
\"The Lord who redeemed Abraham.\" As if to say, The ungodly teachers
have hitherto taught another God, that is, an idol of their heart. Just
as we see that a monk makes up for himself a god who walks in a cap and
is shorn, that is, a god who approves of the cap and the plate.
According to this image of his heart, he then sets himself up with the
outward work 2c.

**Jacob shall not be put to shame again.**

This is a fine contrast. Until now, my people were ashamed and sad under
the godless teachers, they were not improved with their works
righteousness, because where Christ\'s righteousness is not there, the
hearts there must be disgraced. But now that not our righteousness but
Christ\'s righteousness and merit are preached, hearts are lifted up.
Rom. 5:1: \"Now then we have been justified by faith, and have peace
with God.\" For the prophet speaks of trust, so that we may stand before
God and not be put to shame.

V. 23. **For when they see their children, they will sanctify my name.**

52 He calls the believers \"works of his hands\" because no one comes to
Christ unless the Father draws him \[Joh. 6, 44\]. These sanctify his
name, not their name, they give thanks for the benefits of God, they
praise the grace that was shown to the world through Christ. \"And will
sanctify the Holy One in Jacob, and fear the God of Israel,\" for by
\"the Holy One in Jacob\" he secretly points to Christ, in whom the seed
of Abraham, that is, the faithful are sanctified.

V. 24: **For those who have an erroneous spirit will take
understanding.**

\(53\) Not only the deceived people will be converted, but also a part
of those who deceived them and persecuted the word. This is how Paul was
converted. \"And the babblers shall be taught,\" that is, who are quick
(prompti) to teach, which is common to all ungodly teachers. But for
this reason he calls them babblers, because they speak of nothing but
low, earthly, useless, uncertain things, out of their own heads, not out
of God\'s words. Thus, the prophet broadly describes this teaching of
the church, which was gathered by the gospel.

[378 k. XXII, W6-2S8. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 587-SS1.
379]{.underline}

**The thirtieth chapter.**

**V. 1. 2. Woe to the apostate children.**

Here begins a new speech. For the prophet comes again to the people and
to their times, exhorting them to faith and to the fear of God. For
Sanherib king of Assyria drew near to them, who had led away the ten
tribes of Israel. The princes of Judah (for Isaiah speaks only of the
princes, not of the king), who were in great terror, took refuge in the
help of Egypt and abandoned all hope in the help of God, as the flesh is
wont to do. Therefore, in this chapter, the prophet first denounces the
unbelief of the princes and the people and threatens them that this help
will be of no use to them. Then he tries to bring them back to faith
through promises, and to strengthen the hearts of the godly, he
describes the miserable defeat of the king of Assyria, as in the tenth
chapter above, v. 5 ff. He remains mostly with this subject until the
38th chapter.

**Woe to the apostates.**

\(2\) Thus he punishes the king\'s counselors and princes, because they
are apostates both from God and from their king, who seek foreign help,
so that they provoke God to anger all the more. What the Latin
translation has given: Ordiremini telam, of which the meaning according
to the Hebrew is approximately: \"You seek protection without my spirit.

**V. 3 For Pharaoh\'s strength shall be a reproach to you.**

3.^f^ ) This is the saying from the mouth of the Lord, whom they did not
ask: Because you rely on men and not on God, that is, on lies and not on
truth, it will happen that you will be put to shame, according to the
saying \[Proverbs 29:25 Vulg.

f\) Instead of H8 3-6, the 1532 edition has only the following: This is
to be a general saying: whoever relies on men will fall and perish.

will fall.\" Likewise \[Ps. 146, 3.\]: \"Do not rely on princes; they
are men, they cannot help.\" These sayings are explained by daily
experience that those who rely on human help fall most shamefully. That
is why the saying arose among the courtiers: the favor of princes is
like April weather, that is, very unstable. For at that time the
sunshine promises a lasting summer, but rain and hail soon follow. The
wicked have experienced this themselves with their damage, and confess
that it is true. So if one had to rely on men, one would have to rely
most on princes, who are the most powerful and have an abundance of
goods. Since those who surpass others in power and wealth are deceiving,
how much less should one put one\'s trust in those who are not so
powerful and not so rich!

4 Thus it is a common saying that trusting in men is vain and false. But
no one believes it but he who has experienced it. That is where such
speeches come from: What, or whom, is to be believed? The world is full
of infidelity, and the like. But who is to blame? Certainly on you, who
are warned in the first commandment that you should not rely on any man,
and yet you do. Therefore your hope deceives you rightly. Yes, men
sometimes gladly do their duty and help those who are in need; but they
are prevented by God, so that others may learn that the saying of the
prophet is true: \"He who relies on men will fall.\" For a man either
will not, or cannot, or does not know how to help; therefore one should
not rely on men, but on God, who knows, wills, and can save in danger,
be it as great as it may. But because our adversaries neither want nor
are able to do this, we see how often and how finely they have become a
mockery in these years.

**380 L- XXII, 298-30\".** Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 30, 3-8.
w. vi, **591-594. 381**

5 Furthermore, a distinction must be made here. A Christian should
believe of his neighbor that he will be a good shepherd of souls, a good
prince, a good teacher, and yet he should not take this for granted as
if he could not be deceived, but he should add this condition: Lord, if
you will assist him, he will be such; if you will not assist him, I will
not trust him a hair\'s breadth. Thus, if a prince entrusts an office to
someone, let him believe that he will administer it duly, if God will
give it; otherwise not. This means not to put one\'s hope and trust in
man, but in God and divine help.

006 Now when the prophet seeth that the princes of Hezekiah seek the
help of men, he proclaimeth beforehand that they shall be put to shame.
For so it came to pass, as the books of Chronicles testify, that
Sanherib went out against the king of Egypt, and drove him back into
Egypt.

**V. 4. 5. Their princes must have been at Zoan.**

Zoan is a city in Egypt and was a royal residence. Tanis^1^ ) but is
read nowhere else. I think it is the same as Zoan, and had another name
in another language, just as Belgrade and \"Greek-Weissenburg\" 2) is
the same city 2c. He says: You have sent your envoys to the king of
Egypt, but you will achieve nothing.

**V. 6. This is the burden over the animals that go toward the south.**

8\. the word \"burden\" must be taken, as above \[Cap. 19, 1. 21, 1.\],
as a prophecy of future misfortune. For the prophet extends his prophecy
with threats. For he sees camels and other animals standing ready, which
should bring gifts to the king of Egypt. Therefore he prophesies against
these animals and their leaders that they would not be able to do
anything.

9\. calls \"the land of gloom and anguish\".

1\) In the Septuagint and Vulgate, lanis is placed instead of \"zoan\"
at this point.

2\) In the text: which in the first edition

gabe is translated by \"Greek-Weissenburg\".

he Indaea, which the king of Assyria approached.

10\. He says, \"Since there are lions and lionesses.\" This is a very
fierce sermon of punishment. The way out of Judea to Egypt is a great
wilderness, and this contains a great multitude of all kinds of wild
beasts, serpents, lions 2c. Therefore, the prophet alludes to this way.
He says: \"Quite rightly do you messengers, together with your animals,
which you lead laden with gifts, make your way through the desert of
serpents and lions. For you yourselves are the terrible lions and
poisonous serpents, who infect my people with the hope of human help, so
that they turn away from the faith and leave their God and take refuge
in human help. Furthermore, the saying can be given like this: Onus
jumentorum ad austrum euntium, inter quae sunt, in terra angustiae et
necessitatis, leo et leaena, basiliscus et draco volans. Portant super
humeros jumentorum etc. \[This is the burden of the beasts that go
toward the south, among which are, in the land of anguish and distress,
the lion and the lioness, the basilisk and the flying dragon. They lead
on the back of the beasts of burden\" 2c.\]

**V. 7. Rahab will sit quietly by (Superbia tantum est, quiesce).**

11\. Jerome has put a generic name s8uporbi\] instead of a proper name
\[Rahab\], but it must be translated: \"Rahab will sit quietly by it.\"
\"Rahab,\" however, is Egypt, as it is written in the 87th Psalm, v. 4.
\"I will cause Rahab and Babylon to preach.\" It has the name of
hopefulness and presumption. As if he wanted to say: Rahab, from whose
help you expect glorious things, will deceive you and will not be able
to help you.

V. 8 **Go therefore, and write it before them on a tablet.**

Now he adds a sign to his prophecy, as he did above in chapter 8 \[v. 11
ff\]. For he has scolded them so far for taking refuge from God in the
help of men. This very thing, he commands, is now to be written publicly
on a tablet, so that they have no opportunity to excuse themselves. The
writing on the tablet is as follows:

382 D- xx\". 300-303. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. \[sr-ssr.
383

**V. 9. for they are a disobedient people.**

13\. instead of: Populus enim ad iracundiam provocans etc. translate
thus: \"For they are a disobedient people, and lying children, who will
not hear the law of the Lord\" 2c. This is a severe punishment. As if to
say: they should honor GOD, but they irritate Him; they should confess
GOD, but they deny Him. They do not want to hear God\'s word, but they
want to hear what pleases them. So also now the papists say that they
want to be instructed, but so, if one would say what they themselves
approve, as follows. For this passage contains a mean description of all
the ungodly.

**V. 10. But say to the seers: You shall not see.**

14 He calls the prophets \"seers\" and \"see\" the word of God. Here it
must be noted that the Holy Spirit calls right that which those call
heretical, and calls deception and error that which those call truth.
\"Preach us deceit,\" that is, man\'s help; \"and see not the right
doctrine,\" that is, do not tell us much of the faith and fear of God.
\"Preach unto us softly,\" that is, what is well pleasing to us. For the
flesh rejects the word of faith, because it kills the presumption and
the attempts of presumption. Therefore, it takes offense at the word of
GOD.

**V. 11. Let the saint in Israel stop with us.**

\(15\) Tell us about the king of Egypt, who has chariots and horses.
This pleases us better than if you tell us much about the faith in God,
who sits here with us in darkness and does not pay attention to us. Just
as nowadays the princes, when they hear the Gospel spoken, start
laughing loudly and say: \"What are you talking about the Gospel? Be
silent, your gospel is packing itself away from us.

**V. 12-14. Therefore the Holy One speaks to Israel.**

16\. he threatens them with the punishment that follows all the wicked,
that they will perish suddenly. This \"vice\", he speaks, that is, the

Doctrine of presumption on human powers, will be \"like a crack in a
wall,\" which will bring about the fall, shattering you all suddenly and
unexpectedly. This is an exceedingly puffing simile.

**V. 15. By being still and hoping you would be strong.**

\(17\) He seeks to move the hearts of his hearers in various ways, by
exhortation, by threats, and by promises, so that he may draw them away
from hope and trust in human help. Therefore, this is an excellent
promise, that we should expect divine help in hope, and refrain from our
attempts, then we would certainly be preserved. As if to say: If there
is a troubling thing that could trouble you, see to it that you do not
sin, either by despair or by presumption of human help, but be still and
expect salvation, and you will surely be saved. But this way of
overcoming and being saved, our reason does not understand that we can
overcome by\' being quiet. Therefore, the Holy Spirit is needed to
awaken in us faith in the word of the divine promise, that we may be
still and hope, and let the wicked rage and rage against us. But before
God should leave those who are so quiet and hope, he would snatch them
out by his angels. But this expectation of divine help is certain death
for reason. And it is precisely in this promise that the true death of
the flesh is required. Thus faith moves in the midst of the death of the
flesh and of reason, and makes alive 2c.

18 There are many examples of this saying throughout the holy
scriptures, but our present experience also gives ample testimony that
the best and most certain means of overcoming all evil is to be quiet
and secure, and to leave everything to God. For what else has been the
cause that for so many years we have enjoyed a constant peace in the
midst of such great raging and tumult of the world and the princes? It
is not our actions that have brought us this peace and this security,
but rather

384 L. xxn, sos-Ms. Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 30, 15-17. W.
vi,-M-soo. 385

To be quiet and hope, as the prophet says here, is that we in simple
faith have committed ourselves and our cause to God, and with persistent
prayer (for these weapons alone we have against Satan) protect
ourselves. However, even before these times, there were many glorious
examples of this saying.

19 For some years ago there was a bishop of Magdeburg, a count of
Beichlingen, 1) who had been forcibly drawn to the diocese by the
cathedral chapter. It happened by chance that the Duke of Saxony
prepared for war against him because of some disagreements. When the
bishop learned of this, he, 2) like one who lies in a deep sleep, made
no countermeasures to the war, in order to expel force with force, but
he took care of his churches, often found himself in them, improved
their errors, read and prayed diligently, as if there were no war to
worry about from anywhere. However, a spy from the Duke of Saxony was at
the bishop\'s court when the news arrived that the Duke of Saxony had
already started the campaign. Thereupon the bishop said: \"It has good
ways; I will take care of my churches, but God will fight for me. The
spy caught this word and brought it to the Duke of Saxony. Thereupon the
campaign was immediately stopped by the laudable duke, and the soldiers
were dismissed. For he replied that he was much too weak to fight
against someone who had God as his ally in battle. In this way, the hope
for divine help does not fall into disgrace.

\(20\) And this is true not only in matters of religion, but also in
secular matters. For this is how it tends to happen in general, that
hasty actions come to grief; on the other hand, those things go well
which are approached fearfully and with reason. That is why the Romans
praise Fabius, the procrastinator,

1\) Count Frederick of Beichlingen (cf. Walch, St. Louis ed. vol. V,
1204 f.). In the Latin editions: LiefiliüMn, in the one of 1532:
VieUinZen. The former county of Beichlingen is located in the Thuringian
district of the province of Saxony. The Counts of Beichlingen died out
in 1567.

2\) In Latin here is the so-called Inünitivus üistorieus.

**Luther\'s Works, \"d. VI.**

who made up for the bad things by procrastinating. For the presumption
of our powers always puts us to shame. Therefore it is well said:
Patience overcomes all things (Patiens terit omnia virtus); and Paul
says \[Rom. 12:21.), \"Overcome evil with good.\" The world sees such an
outcome, but it does not see the cause, which only the Holy Scriptures
show us.

21 Furthermore, the cause of this promise lies in the first commandment,
where God promises that He will be a protector of the godly 3) and again
that He will punish the wicked. It is therefore impossible that the
godly should not be preserved and that the wicked should not perish. For
the word of God cannot fail. Only in this is it provided of us, that we
cannot expect the moment of time when we shall be preserved, and the
ungodly punished. For God is long-suffering and does not punish quickly.
But the slower He begins to punish, the longer He continues with the
punishment, once He has begun. Because human nature becomes impatient
with this delay, the heart must be raised with such scriptures, and
souls must be accustomed to endure all hardships in the hope of future
redemption. Just as Christ also reminds us when he says Luc. 21, 19:
\"Take hold of your souls with patience\" 2c. For the wicked cannot
endure, and it is certainly true, as they say, Malum destruit se ipsum
\[evil destroys itself\].

\(22\) Therefore, we must be quiet and leave everything in the hands of
God. After that we should also hope for the future redemption, and in
fact experience that hope does not make us ashamed, but our adversaries
will be ashamed, who have undertaken to defend an ungodly cause against
Christ in an ungodly way.

V. 16, 17: **For your thousands will flee from the rebuke of one.**

\(23\) One enemy shall make your lousy fugitive, and ye shall all be
scattered, and there shall not be left any of your host.

3\) Erlanger: xriorurn instead of xiorum; a misprint.

> 13

386 L. XXII, 305-307. interpretations on the prophets. W.VI, 600-603.
387

than a flag. For here he calls a mast in figurative speech a pole on
which the flag hangs.

\(24\) This is the cause of victory, that God takes away the heart of
those who are overcome, and makes the conquerors brave. But a fearful
army is nothing but a heap led to the slaughter, and they are more
painted than living men of war, whose hands are lukewarm and whose sword
is blunt.

**V. 18. Therefore the Lord waits.**

\(25\) He now comes back to the promises, whether he might withdraw them
from the presumption of human powers. As if to say, \"The Lord is still
delaying, so that he will not deliver you to destruction as you think;
he is still waiting for you; therefore desist from your plans and hope.
This is an excellent passage.

**And has set out that he may have mercy on you.**

026 He showeth his patience marvelously. For you provoke him by your
distrust to destroy you; but he is exceedingly patient to spare you, and
to have mercy on you, if only you would expect it, and would not
prescribe the time and manner of helping him.

**For the Lord is a God of judgment.**

27\. he chastens with judgment and moderation, that is, moderately and
with benefit, he does not corrupt altogether; therefore expect counsel
from him.

**Blessed are all those who wait for him.**

28\. Here the service of God is described, that those are true priests
who wait on the Lord. For this is the highest religion of the first
commandment, to fear God in good days and to trust Him in adversity. The
wicked, however, cannot do this, but because they are without faith,
they determine the way and the time to help him, how and by whom and
when they want to be saved. Because the flesh wants to hear, see and
grasp the help with its hands. Therefore, it takes refuge in its own
strength and in its own actions, and does not want to expect help from
God. Therefore it becomes

disgraced, and despairs in the danger. Thus this passage contains an
exhortation and encouragement to faith; just as it is finely said in
Proverbs: \"All will be well who can but endure it.

V. 19. **For the people of Zion will dwell at Jerusalem.**

29 These are excellent promises with which he tells King Hezekiah and
the godly not to despair. First, he promises a gracious and kind God;
second, that Jerusalem and its citizens would be safe; third, that the
crops would be good, that they would not suffer hunger or thirst in the
siege; fourth, even the word of God, by which they would be established,
would be taught 2c. They will hear the word of him who reminds them,
reciting after them, he says; just as shepherds go after the flock of
sheep, so your teachers will go after you, teaching you the right way
2c.

**V.20. And the Lord will give you bread in tribulation.**

30 Instead of: Et dabit tibi Dominus panem artum, translate: \"The Lord
will give you bread in tribulation, and water in anguish.\" For he
promises that he will give blessing against the arrogance of the enemy.

**For he will no longer let your teacher flee away.**

31\. You will have prophets who will teach you the firm and constant
word of promise. For he indicates by the word \"flee away\" such people
who teach inconstant and uncertain things.

V. 21: **And your ears will hear the word spoken behind you:**

The most simple opinion is that the prophet has in mind a shepherd who
walks behind his flock and blows on the flute. As if he wanted to say:
You will have very faithful shepherds who will help you and will fix
their eyes on you 2c., so as to indicate the care of a shepherd for the
souls of his disciples.

Z88 L. xxii, 307-310. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 30, 21. 22.
w. vi. E-eo.\" 389

**This is the way they go.**

These teachers will take care to keep you on the right road of God\'s
commandments, so that you do not stray into the statutes of men or into
your own conceit. But it is a very sweet promise that we shall have many
such teachers as Isaiah to teach us what to do. Under the pope,
everything was in the greatest confusion; no one knew for sure whether
his status (vitae genus) was pleasing to God. But now, by God\'s grace,
the authorities can say of their office: \"This is the way in which I
should go. So a father, a mother, a pupil, a teacher 2c. can say: This
is the way in which I should walk. Thus the words \"this is the way\"
refer to teaching; but the word \"walk in the same\" belongs to
exhortation. Thus a preacher is to be a dialectician who teaches, and an
orator who exhorts.

**V. 22. And you will profane your silvered idols.**

\(34\) After this, saith he, it shall come to pass, that ye shall be
purged from all idolatry. For when one has heard the true doctrine, all
confidence in works and all idolatry falls away and perishes. But here
he indicates the certainty of faith, that the true doctrine makes people
so certain that they can with a clear conscience condemn that which they
previously approved and considered the highest worship. So nowadays we
throw away the caps after we have recognized the true doctrine of the
religion in which we previously placed the highest trust of blessedness.
Thus the annual feast days (anniversaria), the masses, and other ungodly
services have fallen, and lie quite low, just as the prophet here says
of the Jews of his time that they would throw away their oversilvered
idols and the golden garments of their images; not that they hoped as if
their wooden or silver images were capable of anything, but because they
thought that this service was pleasing to God.

35 But there is an emphasis in the words, \"your silvered idols, and the
golden garments of your images. As if he wanted to say, \"Why do you
boast so much about your idols?

Idols? What are they but your works and your powers? But to forsake your
Creator and trust in your own work is the greatest foolishness and the
greatest impiety. Just as there is nothing more foolish than to make a
god out of gold, which serves all: so it is also the greatest folly to
put one\'s trust in other works that are ours, such as fasting, putting
on a cap 2c. For this cannot be denied, that these are our works,
because they would not be done if we would not have it so, and because
our will is lord and regent over all these works. And yet there has been
such a great blindness that neither we have seen this, nor the papists
now see it; but that which properly belongs to the fear of God and to
faith, they ascribe to a godless monk\'s cap, and to a badly kept fast,
namely, that they are true services of God.

\(36\) But where the righteousness of faith has taken hold of the heart,
it works this, that our righteousness becomes a filth to us, and this it
does with great certainty. Apart from this righteousness of faith, it is
impossible not to be taken in by superstition and false worship. For it
has a very great appearance, which blinds the eyes of the simple, while
true faith goes along simply without any appearance, believing in God
and serving the neighbor, as we see in Christ, who went along most
simply, without any makeup, since in him was the highest faith and the
highest love.

\(37\) Therefore the prophet has a secret interpretation in mind when he
says: \"You will desecrate the golden garments of your images. As if he
wanted to say: That covering under which superstition is hidden, and
that appearance, the pure preaching of the Word will take away and lift.
For ungodliness would do no harm if it did not have such an appearance.
Just as we see nowadays in the enthusiasts, who put this on us, that our
religion has no appearance at all. Therefore they take on a gloomy
appearance, wear bad clothes, live lonely (soli) 2c. In sum, they put
all the human

390 L. XXII, 310-312. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, \"06-ÜII.
391

The people of the world are not willing to accept the obligations of
religion under the pretext of religion, so that they may be offered for
sale to the mob under the pretense of sanctity and darken our minds.
Therefore, a great certainty of faith is required that one can reject
and repudiate this. Thus, Muenzer also wanted to eradicate all
appearance of piety, but he himself invented other new appearances, and
yet he thievishly gained the name of godliness through this appearance
among the simple.

**V. 23-25. And there will be on all the great mountains.**

If you believe God the Lord, you will be showered with blessings. \"On
the mountains\", where otherwise there is the greatest barrenness, there
will be the greatest fruitfulness \"when the towers\", that is, the
princes of the Assyrians, \"will fall\". It must have been a great faith
with the king Hezekiah, who believed this prophecy, since everything was
already full of the enemy war army, and Jerusalem was beset with a very
hard siege.

39 This passage, however, prevents us from being offended by divine
promises, which are always very tasteless in appearance and completely
at odds with the facts. For this reason, reason is offended by them, and
considers them to be utterly vain baptisms. Thus we see that the
sacramentarians also measure the divine promises and the word of God
according to reason. Therefore, they necessarily defend their opinion
against the clear words of Scripture. But such passages of Scripture are
well to be remembered, in which the promises thus conflict with the
thing itself. So also, when we die, the promise says: You will live 2c.

**V. 26. And the moon\'s light will be like the sun\'s light.**

40\) He makes the joy great, according to the sense of the blessed, 1)
who have suddenly been delivered from apparent death. For, as we have
shown before, to the sorrowful heart all things seem sad.

1\) Erlanger: eüketura instead of aSeotnra.

against the merry all to be merry and laugh. Therefore he says: Hezekiah
and others, freed from the siege, when they will see the defeat of the
enemies, will rejoice so much that the light of the sun and the moon,
with all too great joy, will seem to them far more pleasant and lovely
than before. They will think that all creatures would be happy and
laughing at the same time 2c. For this picture must be interpreted
according to how the godly are to be understood.

**V. 27. 28. Behold, the name of the Lord comes from afar.**

\(41\) After the prophet has comforted the godly, and tried to turn away
the wicked from the presumption of human powers by many reasons, he now
passes from his people to the Assyrians and threatens them with
destruction. He says: The Assyrian is coming; our God is also coming
full of wrath against him. But he says that the LORD comes from afar, so
that he may express the attitude of those who wait for the hand of the
LORD. For it seems as if God is delaying His help and is looking late at
us. But it is a great description, which required the highest danger of
the godly, so that they would rise up against the impending terror. But
if anyone could believe that God was thus \[\"like a consuming fire\"\]
kindled against our enemies, he would be safe from all danger.

**V. 29. There you will sing.**

After the towers have fallen, you will go through the city with joy,
singing and giving thanks.

**V. 30-32. And the LORD will sound his glorious voice.**

Now he describes the way they will be killed and slain. The Lord will
destroy the Assyrian with thunder and lightning. The thunder he calls
\"the voice of the LORD\", \"timbrels and harps\".

**V. 33. For the pit is prepared from yesterday.**

44\. this place one has declared of the hell, and it also goes on when
one is given to the home.

**392** L. XXII, 312-314. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 31, 1-3.
W. VI, \"11-413. **393**

interpretation. But it seems to me that one must understand it
historically. He calls \"the pit\" (XXX) the slaughter and sacrifice
that was prepared for the Assyrians, which they could not escape, so
that the opinion is this: The Lord will destroy the Assyrians.

Assyrians slaughter, he will prepare a burnt offering, for which \"fire
and wood\" are prepared. Only the blowing is left, by which it is to be
lighted, that is, the lightning. For it alludes to the fall of Sodom.

**The Thirty-First Chapter.**

The content of this chapter is the same as the previous one. For the
prophet admonishes his own in various ways, both by threats and by
promises, so that he may draw them away from trusting in human
protection and help. It is clear, however, that the prophet preached
many sermons of this content. To us, who are out of danger, he seems to
repeat the same thing ad nauseam. But the godly hearts cannot be
satisfied with the word of God in the evil hour of temptation, nothing
is too much.

**V. 1. and do not consider themselves holy in Israel.**

2 He shows the sin against the first commandment. As if to say: What is
this perverse nature that you put your trust in horses and chariots and
not in your Creator? because they seek other saviors besides God.

**V. 2. But he is wise.**

You take me and my God for fools, but you will feel that he is most
wise. Thus, we too are accused by the papists as heretics and rebels.
Therefore, according to the example of the prophet, we can say that the
time will come when we will be all too orthodox and peaceable for the
papists. But this will not be believed until it happens.

**Against the Help of the Evildoers.**

4\. the help is to be taken in a suffering way (passive), which the
Jews, who are evildoers, seek.

**V. 3. For Egypt is man, and not God.**

Here one must notice the conclusion that the inference of the Holy
Spirit teaches us. It is man; therefore it should not be relied upon;
therefore it cannot help. Likewise, it is flesh; therefore it should not
be relied upon; therefore it cannot help. For it must be applied to all
cases of life, and to all doings, and to all works, to all attempts and
human help, which are undertaken without the fear of God. The prophet
uses this saying against the violence of the world and human powers.
What are the kings and princes of Egypt on whom you rely? They are men.
What are their horses? They are flesh. So I can say to a monk: What is
your righteousness that you rely on? What are the masses? What is
fasting? These are human and carnal things which the prophet condemns
here, which are to serve man but not to rule in such a way that men rely
on them. Accordingly, this whole passage is an exhortation to the first
commandment.

**That the helper may grovel, and he who is helped may fall 2c.**

Both the helper and the one being helped will fall.

\(7\) It is to be wondered at that, since there are so many hard sermons
in the holy Scriptures against this presumption, and daily experience
also warns against it, yet nothing is done. The human heart is so
accustomed, even born, to vain confidence and idolatry. If someone

**394** xxn, 314-316. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, 613-617.
**395**

When a man looks at the world, he will see that there is nothing but a
perpetual fall of all generations and classes of men. For they all rely
on flesh. Now he adds the promise of victory, that he may draw them from
human strength.

**V. 4. as a lion roars over his prey.**

8\. in order to raise up the weak, the Lord compares himself to a lion,
which, when it has got a prey, roars, and does not turn to the crowd or
to the cry of the shepherds. You, he says, are my prey, which the
Assyrians will not snatch from me.

**V. 5. as the birds do with wings.**

9 This is a glorious promise. By \"the bird with his wings\" he means a
hen spreading her wings to protect her young.

**V. 6. Turn back.**

10 Namely, from carnal trust to the Lord, who promises this. For this is
what he says: \"Return, you who have greatly departed,\" namely from God
to trust in man.

**V. 7. 8. His young team will become interest-bearing.**

11 I believe that this is to be taken literally. They want to rule over
you, but they will be defeated and overcome. I will deal with them in
such a way \"that they shall be glad to remain peasants\", who now
promise themselves the kingdom over you.

**V. 9. and their rock.**

12 That is, the princes of Assyria with their king Sanherib.

**Who has fire to Zion.**

\(13\) I take it from the household, that God dwells in Jerusalem, and
there is a householder, and there has a hearth, as a citizen. This is a
lovely image, which serves for the uplifting of the hearts. He also said
this without an image in Numbers 35:34: \"Defile not the land wherein ye
dwell, wherein I also dwell among you: for I am the LORD that dwelleth
among the children of Israel.\"

**The Thirty-Second Chapter.**

\(1\) I consider that the former part of this chapter must be connected
with the preceding words, that the opinion is this: Though the king of
Assyria rages against Judah, yet, notwithstanding his raging and
blustering, the kingdom shall remain and endure, and that in the highest
flourishing, quite otherwise than Sanherib thinks. A king will reign in
righteousness, he says; I will give the righteous king to Hezekiah, and
others after him. But one must pay attention to the order here, that he
first gives a righteous head; from the same also follow righteous
princes and other limbs in the worldly regiment.

**V. 2. That every man shall be as one preserved from the wind.**

2 Here note the excellent praise of the authorities, that they are like
a wall that shields from the violence of the winds and the rain.
Likewise, that it is \"like a brook in a dry place, and like the shadow
of a great rock. Consider these parables diligently, and you will see
what a glorious thing it is about the authorities, that they are rightly
called by Christ ευεργέται \[benefactors\] 1).

have been named \[Luc. 22, 25.\]^g^ ) For the

1\) In our Bible it is translated by \"gracious lords.\"

g\) From here to § 9 (exet.) is found in the edition of 1532: But all
this will seem greater if you consider all the circumstances. For if it
is the office of the authorities to honor good works and punish evil
ones, they must necessarily provoke Satan with all his members against
them. But to stand firm in this and not to become fainthearted is a
divine power. They therefore wear crowns, as conquerors of all evils, of
Satan and of the world.

**396** L- xxn, 3i6-3is. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 32, 2. 3.
W. vi. 6i7-\"M. **397**

The office of authority is that it is \"for vengeance on the wicked and
for praise to the pious\" \[1 Petr. 2, 14.\], that is, that it is, as it
were, a protection against the devil and all of his limbs, who think of
nothing else but sedition, theft, adultery, death 2c. Against these
winds, against these storms and tempests, God has established the
authorities in the world.

\(3\) If the princes observed this, they would be blissful; but they do
not, except for the godly who fear God. Thus they are to be called gods
on earth, heroes and saviors of the people. The others, who use the
sword and the power they have against God and their neighbor, and only
think of how they want to disturb the common people and plague the
people, are like a madman who has a sword in his hand. But a righteous
authority is full of mercy and good works, therefore it also arouses
Satan with all his limbs against it.

**Like the streams of water in the arid place.**

4 This is a very lovely image, that the authorities are, as it were, a
fountain in the dry place, and to him who suffers thirst, because by
their protection they control all adversity, and refresh the oppressed.

**Like the shadow of a big rock in the dry land.**

\(5\) It is not only a cooling, but also an umbrella against heat, for
it is a hard evil to suffer heat without shade. But he calls a good
authority a rock, and a firm mountain, which is immovable, and giveth
constant shade, and cannot be bribed by gifts or entreaties not to
execute justice and judgment.

\(6\) But what a great virtue it is to practice this, you can explain at
length according to the secondary circumstances. For if the authorities
undertake to behave as they are described here, they stir up hell
against themselves with all the devils, with their entire citizenship or
principality. In this great apparent danger, she has very few loyal
friends. The rest of the crowd hates her, even those who are close to
her either through blood friendship, or kinship, or

service are closest to her. Here, she is deceived by the dissimulated
services of friends, by the cunning plots of adversaries, by flattery,
by slander, and by a thousand other arts by which they seek to harm her.

Whoever, as a single man, can stand against so many adversaries, against
so many deceptions and flatteries, must be a pious man who will often
think that he alone bears the burden and stands as a single man against
all his own. If he is now fainthearted, he will throw away his shield
and flee, and full of anger say: Let whoever wants to rule, he does not
want it. It is such a miserable thing to be a ruler that they would have
to be moved by impatience and the evil nature of the matter to let down
all courage if they were not upheld by God.

For this reason, he portrays the authorities as a rock with a stony
heart that cannot be moved by pleading, threats or flattery. Just as
that woman of David said, 2 Sam. 14, 17: \"My lord the king is like an
angel of God, that he may hear good and evil.\" For she confesses that
there were people who spoke evil of him, the most happy and praiseworthy
king, and others who spoke good of him; however, he did not turn to all
this, but broke through, as it were, with closed eyes, and did what was
right. This requires not only immense courage, but also great wisdom and
patience, because everyone who rules is, as it were, a target at which
Satan and the world aim all their arrows. Therefore, whoever accepts an
office of authority, let him take courage, not from his own strength,
but let him pray with bended knees, like Solomon, that God Himself will
rule. Therefore, it is rightly said: Regiment shows what kind of man a
person is, and godly kings wear crowns, as conquerors of all evil.

V. 3 **And the eyes of those who see will not be blinded.**

9\. there will also be godly teachers and disciples. And here behold,
that good authorities

398 L. xxn, 319-321. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, S2o-\"2z.
399

The Roman Empire served the religion and the Gospel so that it could be
spread further. Thus, in the time of the apostles, the Roman Empire
served the Gospel, so that people had the opportunity and time to know
God.

**The ears of the listeners will pay attention.**

10 This is a promise that the word of God will not be taught in vain.

V. 4. **And the careless will learn prudence.**

When the word of God is taught purely and loudly, the evil teachers are
eradicated. And the preaching of the Gospel is always followed by the
improvement of the ungodly teaching and ungodly life that preceded it.
\"Careless ones\" (praecipites corde) he calls those who are quick to
teach, which is the common error of false apostles. \"Those who stammer
with their tongues\" are the useless teachers, who, although they do not
know how to teach, nevertheless teach, as the whole papacy does. Thus,
Thomas and the Summists wrote nothing but their tribal tales. But
nowadays there are people \"who speak finished and pure.

V. 5. 6. **No longer will a fool be called a prince.**

12\) There follows also an improvement in the secular regiment. \"A fool
shall no more be called a prince,\" that is, those who preside over
others evil, whether in the secular regiment or in the office of the
word, shall have their dominion taken from them.

**V. 7: For the miser\'s rule is vain harm.**

13 \[What is given in Latin: Fraudulenti vasa pessima sunt, we
translate:\] Avari marsupium malignum est, that is, he does no one good,
he seeks only his own; that it is, as it were, a proverb by which he
describes a wicked authority, whether secular or spiritual. For both
benefit no one by seeking only what is theirs and being stingy. A wicked
teacher misuses his science, his judgment, his knowledge of languages
and other gifts he has only for his own benefit. This is also the way
those do it who work in the courts of the

Princes are. The following resolution is, as it were, an explanation of
this. For just as he described above \[v. 2 ff.\] the benefit of a good
authority, so here he also describes an evil authority that does not do
its office, whether in the church or in the secular government, but does
harm under the best of appearances, as the examples in the courts of
princes and in the church teach.

**If he is to speak the poor man\'s right.**

14 This is ambiguous. The first opinion, which seems to me to fit best,
is this: When he should speak to comfort or protect the poor, he uses
lies to deceive him. But the other is this: The poor man speaks right,
but he is oppressed by the tyrant 2c. I do not follow this opinion.

**V. 8. But the princes will have princely thoughts.**

This is the opposite of the preceding, and means: he has noble (liberal)
thoughts, how he may create benefit and advantage for all. For he knows
that he was appointed for this purpose, so that he might be of more use
than to sit on top, so that he might serve rather than rule. And he
remains with such thoughts. For what the Latin interpreter has given:
Super duces stabit, that reads according to the Hebrew: Perseverat in
liberalitate \[he persists in the nobility of mind\].

**V. 9. Arise, you proud women.**

16 Here begins a new main part. As if he wanted to say: Everything is
fine now: Religion and the worldly government have been restored. But
our ingratitude and security will make us fall again into the old
ungodliness in time, and heap wrath and punishment upon us until this
kingdom is utterly destroyed. And this also happened after Christ\'s
suffering, after the gospel was spread by the apostles. For he points
not to the Babylonian captivity alone, but to all other calamities until
the future of Christ, who will pour out his Spirit into the hearts of
the faithful 2c. \"Women\" he calls the secure cities and commonwealths,
according to a common figure of speech.

**400** L. XXII, S2I-ÄS3. Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 32,
10-20. W. VI, 823-627. **401**

**V. 10: It is a matter of year and day.**

17\. he indicates the future desolation by the Chaldeans, in which he
includes all other calamities except Christ.

**V. 11. It is present undressing.**

\(18\) This is coming upon you, that ye shall be stripped of the
kingdom, and of the peace of the world, and of all your possessions,
2c., and be made bare, that is, miserably desolate, and be girded about,
that is, with sackcloth.

**V. 12-14. People will complain about the fields.**

19\. he declares the nakedness. As if he wanted to say: All this will
become a desert, that there will be no one to cultivate it.

**That the towers and fortresses become eternal caves.**

20 This is a clear passage that the word \"eternal\" means an indefinite
time, not eternity. For eternity, that is, for a long time.

**V. 15 Until such time as the Spirit from on high is poured out on
us.**

21\. by our ingratitude we will deserve that this city and the whole
kingdom be destroyed until the end of all calamity, Christ, comes and
his spirit is poured out on us, namely on the day of Pentecost, Apost.
2, 1. ff. Others draw the word \"until then\" to Cyrus; but I understand
the rest of this chapter to be about the kingdom of Christ.

**So then the desert will become a field (in car^-^ melo), and the field
will be counted for a forest.**

\(22\) The wilderness, that is, the remnant of the Jews and the
Gentiles, will be like a field well cultivated. They will bear very
abundant fruit in the faith of Christ. And \"the field\" (carmel = the
orchard), that is, the synagogue, which now flourishes, will be made a
forest and desolate.

**V. 16-18. And the fruit of righteousness will be peace (et erit opus
justitiae pax).**

This is a well-known Hebrew expression: Triticum est opus agri, that is,
the field brings forth wheat, that thus \"work\" (opus) is put for
\"fruit.\" But here he speaks of the work of faith, the peace of the
conscience; like Rom. 5, 1: \"Therefore having been justified by faith,
we have peace\" 2c. This was not fulfilled under Cyrus after the
Babylonian captivity, therefore I have been compelled to refer it to the
times of the gospel.

24 But there is an emphasis on the pronoun: \"my people\". For he
thereby indicates that it will be a new people. But he makes a threefold
assurance against a threefold terror: that the law requires of us a
righteousness which we cannot perform; then sin bites us; finally death
corrupts and kills us. Against these things he promises us a threefold
security.

**V. 19. But hail will be down the forest.**

25 He calls Jerusalem a \"forest\" because it was built of wood from the
forest of Lebanon. But he calls it descensionem saltus or a sloping
forest because of its location, for it was sloping toward midnight. As
if to say: There will be a terror of consciences in the unbelieving
Jerusalem, which is sloping, and by its position indicates its future
ruin and fall.

**V. 20: Blessed are you who sow.**

The synagogue spurned the gospel. Therefore \"well unto you,\" O
apostles, \"which sow in every place,\" that is, preach the word
everywhere. \"By the waters,\" that is, among all peoples, as you let
the feet of oxen and asses go out to pasture (for by the waters are
fertile oers, and fit for pasture), that is, you teach, practice,
instruct both the perfect teachers and the weak and imperfect disciples.

[402 D. XXII, 324-326. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 627-631.
403]{.underline}

**The Thirty-Third Chapter.**

**V. 1. But woe to you, you destroyer!**

1 He now returns to his subject, namely the Assyrians; and to comfort
his own, he prophesies to the Assyrians their future defeat. Woe unto
thee, thou destroyer, who art not destroyed! Thus, I think, it must be
translated, so that he may secretly have his aim on the speeches of
those who frightened the people with the fear of the Assyrians. As if he
wanted to say: I know well that the king of Assyria is a disturber and
has not been disturbed by anyone yet. But it is nothing that you
frighten the weak with these speeches.

**When you have completed the disturbing.**

This is an excellent and quite theological passage, that God saves His
own when they seem to be completely lost, and that He then disturbs the
wicked when they think they already have the victory in their hands.
Therefore, in the 9th Psalm, v. 10 \[Vulg.\], he is called \"a helper in
due time.\" Therefore the godly hope where there is nothing to hope for,
and believe when all is lost, and so are saved. For they know that if
one stretches the bow too much, it breaks, and if one has risen to the
highest, he falls back again. But the wicked have no measure in
stretching the bow, that is, they are sure, and do not think that any
danger lies ahead of them. Therefore they go on raising their hopes
higher and higher; and when these are in the best bloom, they are
destroyed, and the bow jumps together with the string, and leaves the
wicked in his presumption. Furthermore, this should serve as an example
for us to maintain faith in perils and hardships. This is how the pope
began to fall at the Costnitz Council, when he had risen to the highest.

V. 2. **Lord, have mercy on us.**

3\. after the prophet has strengthened the people through his preaching,
he also prays. Because through these two pieces, the word and the
prayer,

we contend, and entertain faith. For the word sustains faith, and prayer
overcomes and triumphs even against the psorts of hell. For God cannot
abandon the faithful, especially when they pray.

**Be her arm early.**

4 This is my people who are so fearful. The prayer is short, but
powerful; just as the sermon, which he sent before, is short, but
exceedingly fierce. For that he adds \"early\" expresses the fervor of
the one praying. For when the heart is fearful, and faith is in
distress, and when no outcome appears, then all delay is too long.
Therefore, \"early\" means as much as quick.

\(5\) Furthermore, the prayer must be such that there is nothing in it
of merit or human power, but only the divine mercy is invoked. The
impending distress was so great, and yet he does not need many words,
but sighs constantly in his heart. The washers in prayer only make much
effort with the mouth, but the heart knows nothing of it, and it is only
an effort of the body. Such a prayer Christ rejects as a useless one.

V. 3. **Let the nations flee from the great tumult (a voce angeli).**

\(6\) To the prayer he attached a promise and a prophecy of future
salvation. As if to say, \"Why are you afraid of the king of Assyria? He
may have a great multitude, but he will flee at the voice of a single
angel, and will leave you in peace. \"The voice\" he calls the thunder
by which the Assyrians were struck and put to flight.

**V. 4. How to gather up the locusts.**

7 Let us take a likeness of our small flying animals (aviculis). The
king of Assyria gnaws and corrupts everything with

404 **L. XXII, 326-328. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 33, 4-10.
W. VI, 631-634.** 405

His army, like the locusts; and it shall come to pass, that he shall be
driven out of one another suddenly, and shall be scattered, as the
sparrows are scattered out of the threshingfloor. But what the Latin
translator has given: Velat cum fossae plenae, etc., should be
translated thus, \"As the beetles are scattered when they are
attacked.\"

V. 5. 6. **The Lord is exalted.**

8\. the reason why such a mighty king will perish is this: Because,
saith he, the LORD is a citizen in Zion 2c. He has given us his word,
therefore all things are full of judgment and righteousness. For with
those who believe this word (as at least some must necessarily believe)
is dominion, salvation, wisdom, prudence and the fear of the Lord. By
these weapons Sanherib will be overcome.

\(9\) Now this is emphatically spoken, that he saith, In thy time. As if
he were mocking the Assyrians: these gifts are within these walls which
you have shut in by siege. These will put thee to flight and scatter thy
men of war.

V. 7. **Behold, their messengers.**

\(10\) This is a refutation of those rumors which the unbelievers
spread, with which they frightened the simple-minded people. For the
following words are to be taken in imitation.

V. 8 The **paths are desolate.**

11\. as if to say: everything is occupied by the weapons of the
Assyrians, there is nowhere safe to go.

**It does not hold good faith.**

12 That is, the enemy keeps no terms of peace, neither faith nor
loyalty, but devastates everything with fire and sword.

**He does not respect people.**

That is, he does everything with force and weapons. He gives no ear to
the pleas of the supplicants 2c. All circumstances make the despair
greater.

14 But \"messengers of peace\" is what he mockingly calls those who, in
comforting the people

sten, and diminish the powers of Sanherib, increasing the terror, and
bringing the people to despair by their sad message.

15 These are excellent examples that should comfort us in the
temptations of Satan, when he snatches away all hope and trust in divine
mercy, and presents God to us as a wrathful one. But it is clear from
this what a great faith must have been in Isaiah, which was able to
stand up against these despairing speeches with the words.

**V. 9. Lebanon stands shamefully hewn.**

Some follow here the secret interpretation; I take it as a confusion of
the names for Jerusalem itself; as if the messengers wanted to say with
their bad news, which made the Assyrians power great: 1)) It seems to me
as if I saw Jerusalem, which is like Lebanon and Saron 2c., laid in
ashes by the Assyrians.

**V. 10. Now I will make up my mind.**

\(17\) This passage is very theological and useful in all temptations,
whether of death or other dangers. For it contains a description of the
victory against Satan. For when we see that with us is the highest
despair, and with the adversaries hope, then come the arrows of Satan,
who pours oil on the fire, and blows on it to press us and tread us
under foot. \"God has forsaken him, pursue after him and seize him\"
\[Ps. 71:11\].

18 Accordingly, this passage comforts us that we learn that Satan falls
when he most fiercely opposes us and stands at the top of the wheel. We
have seen examples of this in Muenzer and in the peasants, whose
defiance was so great that they did not want to enter into any contracts
or agree to any conditions. But what happens? They have suddenly been
overthrown and are lying low. Therefore, we are to learn that this is
God\'s way, that He lets the devil rise so high that he cannot rise any
higher. When this has happened, only then does he speak, as follows: Now
I will

1\) The Erlanger has here wrong interpungirt: quasi Uieant: ÜXuneii ete.

406 **L. xxn, 328-33i.** Interpretations on the prophets. **W. vi.
634-637.** 407

Now I will rise wonderfully. That is why the godly hope most
persistently when they are beset by the most certain despair.

**V. 11. 12. You get pregnant with straw.**

This is arrogance against arrogance, and presumption against
presumption, as also in the second Psalm \[v. 1 ff.\], where in the
first three verses the highest despair is indicated, since it is said:
the nations, the kings, the princes, the heathen, in sum, the whole
world rages against Christ; and yet he immediately adds: \"He who dwells
in heaven laughs at them. And so he answers scornfully to the greatest
threats. The prophet does the same thing here. He says: \"You messengers
are with child along with the Asfyrians; you want nothing but the
destruction of the city of Jerusalem and to give birth to your glorious
triumphs. But you will give birth to stubble, which the fire will
consume. For the likeness is taken from fearful hearts, which, as the
poet \[Horace\] says, want to give birth to mountains, and after great
effort give birth to a mouse.

\(20\) But it is a good consolation to raise us up in the midst of
death, and in the midst of the battle against all the Turks and the
Teusel. For every wicked man, when he rages most fiercely, gives birth
to stubble. Thus Absalom let himself think that he wanted to take the
whole kingdom, he was indeed a very swollen belly, but he gave birth to
\"misfortune and a miss\", as it says in the 7th Psalm, v. 15. \"He did
a miss.\"

**Fire will consume you with your courage.**

21 Translate: \"Fire will consume you with your courage. As if to say,
\"What is it that you are so puffed up about and pregnant with?
Certainly it is stubble that is prepared for fire. But it is exceedingly
his images that he calls being pregnant, being puffed up in his courage,
and relying on his strength. If one asks the Assyrian for the cause of
this, it is that he has many men of war and an abundance of all military
equipment. But what are these things? If one consults the flesh

If the Jewish people are not drawn, they are insurmountable weapons that
will bring certain destruction and devastation to the Jewish empire. But
the faith considers it as stubble, which a single spark consumes and
burns. It alludes to the thunder and lightning with which God destroyed
the Assyrians and drove them into flight.

\(22\) Thus, if we believe God and call upon Him, our adversaries are
truly stubble and chaff, regardless of how great and powerful they are,
and even if they were so great and powerful that, in comparison with
them, we seemed to be chaff and stubble, but they seemed to be immovable
rocks and mountains, like the Caucasus. And yet, against this power, we
can surely boast that so many angry princes, so many weapons and steeds
are stubble, and if they also accomplish something, that this is also
stubble, however much they are puffed up and promise themselves a
certain victory.

\(23\) It is therefore a glorious comfort to the godly that Sanherib
will perish and Jerusalem will remain unharmed. And especially is this
image to be noted, that he says: Sanherib with his army are stubble, as
if I would call the Turkish army in the siege before Vienna stubble. And
this faith overcame and defeated the Assyrian army; but we should also
apply it to our own trials. If someone is oppressed by poverty, he feels
that it rages like a man in armor. But faith in the Lord Jesus Christ
feels that it is not a man in armor, but stubble. Thus sin is like the
great Goliath, and assails the conscience with all its might. But if you
believe in the Lord Jesus, who died for you, you will feel that sin is
lighter and weaker than stubble.

\(24\) In this way, consciences must be raised so that no storm is so
great that, when it is overcome by faith, one does not feel that it is
only stubble. Thus it is said in the second Psalm, v. 4, that the raging
of the whole world against Christ does nothing but move God to laughter.
But here we feel

408 u. xxn, 331-333. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 33, II-18. W.
vi, M-E 409

We must recognize the weakness of our faith, which cannot believe this
in such a way that it thinks that all the heads in a great army of war
are individual straws which a little breeze can move. Thus he opposes
this to each other, as faith looks at a thing, and as it falls into the
eyes. Thus I consider the pope and our angry neighbors to be stubble and
straws. For they are not to be considered tyrants, but weak straws and
stubble. Therefore, this passage contains an excellent example of faith.

**V. 13. Hear therefore, ye that are afar off.**

The prophet continues to comfort his own and to refute the wicked who
increase the fear of the people through sad rumors. Here, too, he cites
the speeches of the wicked:

**V. 14. Who is among us that may dwell by a consuming fire? 2c.**

26 As if to say, \"It will happen that Jerusalem will be set on fire by
the Assyrians, who will be able to stay there? The prophet and the Holy
Spirit answer, \"The godly will remain, and they will remain in the
highest happiness and in the abundance of all things. But you, the
wicked, together with the enemies, the Assyrians, will perish at the
same time. But the prophet shows by such sermons, although with
concealed words, what^h^ ) some courtiers of the king have taught
against him, in order to put the people into unrest and to frighten
them. For this is what reason is wont to do: it measures the forces and
the armaments on both sides. But this shall not be done by the godly,
but they shall believe that the adversaries are pregnant with stubble.

27 Note the saying, \"The sinners of Zion are terrified; trembling has
come to the hypocrites.\" For this kind of people are the most secure in
good days; again, in adversity, the most despondent.

**V. 15. He who walks in righteousness.**

28 This is a description of the godly. \"He who walks in righteousness\"
is,

h\) In the 1532 edition: \"that\".

in faith, by which we receive mercy or forgiveness of sins from God, and
in turn are merciful to others. He who is such a one will remain
unharmed even if he were alone among a hundred thousand Assyrians.
Therefore, be just and holy, serve God in faith, and do good to your
neighbor; then you will be safe from all danger.

**V. 16: He certainly has his water (Aquae ejus fideles erunt).**

29\. fideles, that is, certainly, that will not deceive, will not cease,
will not lack. These are apt promises, as that in the 37th Psalm, v. 25.
is, \"I have never seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed go after
bread.\"

**V. 17. You will see the land expanded.**

30 That is, your eyes will not only see the city freed from the siege,
but also everything outside the city safe from the enemies. These are
excellent promises for the faithful, in which he imagines that things
will look quite different from what they saw, and by which he promises
something quite different from what the messengers had promised, whose
unbelief had brought them the siege and the other hardships of the war.

**V. 18. That your heart will be greatly astonished.**

That is, you will tremble before the majesty of the king, and you will
be amazed at such great and sudden happiness, because in one night the
siege will be lifted and everything will be restored to its former
state.

**Now where are the scribes?**

This word \[literatus\] seems to mean such a man who has experience in
laws as those who are in the courts, who are counselors to the princes.
When the king of Assyria is defeated, you will say, \"Where are his
councilors and chancellors now?

**Where are the councilors?**

33 I take ponderator for a pension master, who is appointed over the
pensions and takes care of the \[royal\] treasury.

410 L. xxii, W-.!.;s. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. \"40-644.
411

**Where are the chancellors?**

I understand by doctor parvulorum a chancellor who writes the orders and
settles the cases 2c. As if he wanted to say: All scholars, mighty men,
wise men, whom Sanherib has with him, will be put to flight and perish.

V. 19. **The people of deep speech.**

35 Thus he calls the Assyrians, as foreigners (barbaros), who used a
language other than Hebrew.

V. 20. 21. **Look, Zion.**

He continues with the promises of the future deliverance, and compares
Jerusalem to a permanent \"tabernacle. What he says about the streams or
\"moats\" is to be taken figuratively and not historically; and the
prophet himself explains the image, and says what kind of moats they
are, namely \"the LORD our judge\" 2c.

**Which nails shall never again be pulled out.**

37 He still remains in the picture, because the huts are used to be
fastened with nails. Therefore the opinion is this: Jerusalem will
remain as a fortified and stable tabernacle until Christ.

**V. 22. For the LORD is our judge.**

38 Here he explains the moat with which Jerusalem is fortified, namely
the LORD as judge and teacher and protector.

V. 23. **Let them tighten their ropes, yet they will not hold.**

39 For greater comfort, he makes a comparison, comparing the tabernacle
of Jerusalem to the tents of the Assyrians. As if he wanted to say: The
Assyrians also have tents that are fastened, but their nails and ropes
are not strong and firm enough, therefore they will fall over the heap.
A \"pole tree\" he calls the one on which the flag hangs. You will flee
from it so full of fear that you will not have room nor heart to put out
the field signs or flags, but one will flee out here, the other out
there.

**Then much delicious plunder will be distributed.**

40\. After the Assyrians are put to flight by God Himself, they will
leave you very great spoils.

V. 24. **The people will have forgiveness of sins.**

41 Because the godly people have a gracious God, their sins will be
forgiven and they will receive a very happy and very rich victory.

**The Thirty-Fourth Chapter.**

1 The two following chapters are understood by different people in
different ways. Most of the commentators refer them to the last day. I
leave others to their opinion, but hold that the prophet is speaking of
the final desolation of the synagogue, when the kingdom and priesthood
of this people will be transferred from the church established by the
apostles. For since in the preceding chapter he makes glorious promises
of the tabernacle, which was to be firm and eternal, and of the
impregnable walls of Jeru

salem, the unbelieving Jews were puffed up about it, and defied it
extraordinarily, and surely despised Christ with his apostles, who
taught and warned them. Therefore Christ also threatens: \"The kingdom
\[of God\] will be taken from you and given to the Gentiles who bring
forth its fruits \[Matth. 21, 43\]. And the prophet prophesies here with
somewhat dark words that they would be destroyed to the ground by the
Romans for the sake of this presumption. But at the same time the
destruction of the Hei-

412 **L. XXII, 335-338.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 34, 1-6.
**W. VI, 644-647.** 413

This includes those who were not satisfied with the destruction of the
synagogue, but also raged against the apostles and the saints.

\(2\) Perhaps this connection with the foregoing seems somewhat harsh.
But we see that the prophets generally have a way of reaching over from
the present kingdom to the future kingdom of Christ, partly to comfort
the godly, partly to frighten the godless, who, puffed up by the great
promises, were surely presumptuous. This is also punished by John Matth.
3, 9: \"Do not think that you will say to yourselves, \'We have Abraham
as our father\'\" 2c.

**V. 1. Come near, you Gentiles.**

This is a general reminder, which concerns first the Jews, then also the
Gentiles. But he makes such a splendid preface because he speaks against
the presumptuous and the secure. You will hear terrible things, he says,
the Lord will draw his sword.

**V. 2. army (militia).**

4 This word occurs frequently in the prophets. It does not mean war
alone, but it is a general name for all human activities. Thus the
religion of the Jews is called militia.

**He will banish them.**

5\. He speaks first of the Jews, who were devastated by the Romans.

**V. 3. 4. and will rot all the host of heaven.**

6 Thus he calls the religion of the Jews, because they had a divine
service, which was established by God. The other peoples\' worship,
religion and doings were only an earthly army (militia), because they
did not have the Word, just as the papacy is today. And this passage
moves me to take it from the transmission and change of religion, which
never happened before, that the whole religion, with all the sacrifices
and worship of this heavenly people, decayed,

and that the services instituted by God should not help, since it did
not want to hear the Gospel, to which all human activity should give
way.

**And heaven will be wrapped up like a letter.**

This indicates that the practice of religion will perish. The heavens
will be rolled up as they are spread out, that is, the priesthood, which
is now in strong use and in great dignities, will be abolished
altogether, and it will then no longer be needed. We see this today with
the Jews.

**As a leaf withers on the vine. 1)**

\(8\) These words are clear, so that it is easy to understand which
people he is talking about, namely, the very best and holiest, whose
fathers bore grapes and the sweetest fruit. For this people had the
greatest men, and yet their descendants perish because of their
unbelief.

**V. 5. for my sword is drunk in heaven.**

9\) \"In heaven\", that is, in the synagogue where God is served, where
the holy fathers flourished before. Accordingly, the opinion is: the
sword of the Romans will abolish the synagogue, and at the same time
destroy Edom. For we read in history that the Edomites came to the aid
of the Jews with almost the third part of their warriors. But they were
defeated by the Romans at the same time as the Jews. Others prefer to
take Edom as a confusion of names, that \"heaven\" means the priesthood
and the church regiment, but \"Edom\" means the worldly regiment.

**V. 6: The Lord\'s sword is full of blood and thick with fat.**

010 This signifies a very great slaughter of the nobles and great men of
the people, when the Levites and priests were.

1\) In the editions: Xon äMntzt koliurn äs vinsa, which is obviously
wrong. It will have to be read with the Vulgate: vtzüust sient ätzüuit
loUurn ätz vintzu. - In the Jena: lolium, a printing oversight.

444L . **XXII, 338-340.** Interpretations on the Prophets. **W. VI,
\"47-sso.** 445

**For the LORD is holding a great slaughter at Bozrah.**

Bozrah is a very famous city of Arabia in Idumea. But I hold that
\"Edom\" must be taken for Judea, and \"Bozra\" for Jerusalem by
confusion of the names. And for this purpose the allegorical mind
serves. \"Bozrah\" means a fortress. Therefore he aims with this name at
the presumption of this people, which relied on the kingdom, and at the
priesthood, which was appointed by God. \"Edom\" means something red and
bloody, and refers to the raging of the Jews; just as it is said
elsewhere \[Proverbs 1:16, Isaiah 59:7, Romans 3:15\]: \"Their feet are
quick to shed blood\" 2c.

**V. 7: The unicorns will have to come down with them.**

He calls the high priests who were at that time \"unicorns\". These will
perish at the same time as the Edomites. \"Oxen\" are the powerful ones.

**V. 8. The year of retribution.**

13\. God wants to avenge Zion, that is, the church, which has not been
struck out of its kind and has not become an Edom and Bozrah, but which
is the true Zion that suffered persecution from Edom and Bozrah.

**V. 9. 10. Then their streams will turn to pitch.**

14\. before they were a river of God, as it is written in the Psalms
\[Ps. 46, 5. 65, 10.). But \"then their streams will be turned into
pitch\". They will burn in themselves like pitch, with hatred and envy
against Christ and the Christians. Therefore we see today the quite
diabolical envy and hatred of the Jews against us, with which they can
do no harm. For they are given over to ungodly opinions, from which
nothing but a stench of ungodliness and blasphemy rises. This is how the
prophet describes how the synagogue will be after its destruction.

**That no one will go through it for eternity.**

15\. there will be a wasteland and nothing but desolation.

**V. 11. but bitterns and hedgehogs shall dwell there; night owls and
ravens shall dwell there.**

\(16\) They are wild and solitary birds, by which he indicates that the
people are forsaken. But he looks mainly at their teachers, who do not
make the consciences happy, but rather frighten them with their singing
and teaching. Thus, today the papacy has as teachers in theology swamp
birds (ibides = ibises), ravens, night owls and birds of ill fortune,
who do nothing with their teaching but lead people away from Christ and
leave them in loneliness, that is, in constant doubt and despair,
teaching nothing thorough of Christ\'s benefits.

**Den**[. With this delicate image he indicates that it should never be
rebuilt. They have a measuring line and a plumb line, as if they wanted
to rebuild. They dream of an empire and restoration of the previous
state. But this guideline is a guideline of desolation, and their plumb
line is a plumb line of vanity, that is, they will not achieve anything
with their actions, they will never make up for this fall of their
kingdom and priesthood.]{.underline}

**V. 12: That their lords should be called lords without a country, and
all their princes should come to an end.**

18 In the Vulgate: Nobiles ejus non erunt ibi,) in the Hebrew it reads
somewhat differently, namely, that they will only be lords according to
the title. For he ridicules the hope of the Jews, which they made of the
restoration of the kingdom, and the promises of which they boast,
namely, that they would again be installed in the kingdom. He says,
\"You will have the empty name of the kingdom; in fact, you will not be
any happier.

**V. 13-15. And shall be a dwelling place for dragons, and pasture for
ostriches.**

19 He describes their teachers whose voices are ominous and never
comforting.

[**416** L. XXII, 340-342. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 34,
13-17. W. VI, 6S0-N4. **417**]{.underline}

\') Besides, here the grammarians have a lot of trouble with the meaning
of the words, which designate things, which are no longer in use; just
as almost in all languages there is a great obscurity in the words,
which designate things. What the Latin translation has given daemonia
and onocentaurum, the Hebrews call XXX and XXX of which one can read
above the 13th chapter, v. 21.

21 ff\], can look up. Some take XXX for what we call \"marten\", and XXX
for vulture, Pilosus, I believe, is a satyr or a faun. Lamia is called
in German a \"Kobold\" or \"Schretlein\", 1) spirits that wander about
in houses, and let themselves be used for the service of men. But these
are, as I said, uncertain things.

\(20\) By this, as I have said, he means the ungodly teachers who
deceive and rob souls and bring them to ruin, who are subject to all
errors, as we also see today in our enthusiasts, that once Christ and
the true Word are lost, there is no end to error and nonsense. First
they began to dispute about Holy Baptism, calling it a dog\'s bath; then
they also disputed about the Sacrament. Now they have spread several
opinions also in this doctrine. Others again put the doctrine of free
will on the track. These are all goblins and

1\) Here in the edition of 1532 the following is inserted: But this is
to be taken at all from all who do not have the word. These have such
teachers.

1\) Cf. Walch, St. Louiser Ausg, Vol. Ill, 1150, where they are called
\"Wichtlein\" or \"Hehltäpplein\".

Night owls. The same happened to the Jewish people and to us, since we
learned Averrhoes and Aristotle in the schools instead of Christ and
Paul, and Thomas and Scotus followed them.

\(21\) Therefore, this passage is to be taken in a general way, full of
all those who have fallen away from the integrity of the word.
Therefore, we should give thanks to God that we have been freed from
these monsters, and we should watch that we remain true to the Word. He
who has once fallen away from it always falls from one error into
another, as we see in all the Jews and heretics.

V. 16: **Search now in the book of the Lord.**

You did not want to believe God when he threatened, now you learn from
experience that he is true. For you will find that all these calamities
were foretold to you in the book of the Lord, Deut. 28:15 ff.

What the Latin translator has given: Alter alterum non quaesivit, has
this opinion: There is no lack of all that has been predicted there, but
everything will be fulfilled in you.

V. 17. **He gives the lot over them.**

24\. The wicked have their lot measured out, which they will not be able
to change. They did not want to accept the word, therefore they will
receive the deserved reward for believing the lies. They did not want to
hear Christ, therefore they will have to hear Satan. That is their lot.

**The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.**

In the previous chapter he spoke about the last desolation of the
synagogue. Now follows the prophecy of the church itself, which sprang
from the remnant of the desolate synagogue. But he speaks entirely in
the spirit, and proclaims many and glorious things of the church
beforehand,^j^ ) which, if one looks at

j\) Here the edition of 1532 continues (until ?5 iuel.) like this: But
because he adds consolations everywhere, it is clear from this that he
is talking about the church, which is not subject to the external world.

sees the outward appearance, are nowhere to be seen. That is why he adds
consolations everywhere.

He calls the church a desert because it has no outward appearance of
works, which the world admires. And for this reason he calls the church
a desert, because it has no outward appearance of works, which the world
admires. Nevertheless, it is a pleasant desert, in which there is grace,
the Holy Spirit, a happy conscience, forgiveness of sins, knowledge of
God, good works, all of which the world neither sees nor admires,
because it is seduced by the glorious appearance of outward works.

**418** L. XXII, 342-345. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
\"54-657. **419**

so that it is clear that he is talking about the church, which seems to
be oppressed, but is adorned and richly endowed with spiritual gifts.

**V. 1. But the desert and wasteland will be funny.**

2 In the Vulgate it reads: Laetabitur deserta et invia, but\] in Hebrew
the neuter is: Desertum et solitudo laetabitur. This image is also used
by the Latins, and they call it laetum agrum \[a merry field\], when
everything looks merry and lovely in the springtime. Thus he says here
of the church that it flourishes and stands very cheerful; and yet he
calls it a desert and wasteland, that he thereby indicates that this is
true in spirit, but hidden according to the flesh. For the church does
not flourish and flourish in the righteousness of works, in the wisdom
of the flesh, or in the power of the world, but in all things the
opposite appears in the church, for it does not walk as a monk, but in
simple clothing, food and place. Then their way of life is the same as
that of other people, and nothing special or different from the way of
life of other people; but there is father, mother, servant, maid, wife,
husband, teacher, pupil 2c. There is no boastful semblance of holiness
in these estates. Therefore it even seems to be a desert, in which no
blossoms of the carnal righteousness and wisdom of the world are seen;
and yet it has blossoms and shoots of grace and the Holy Spirit, namely
the trust in Christ, that he is our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, that he is our treasure \[1 Cor. 1:30\].
From this trust follows a good and cheerful conscience. For in Christ
there is peace, life, joy 2c.

But these immeasurable gifts are without appearance in the world, and
are not seen; yet the works of love also shine outwardly, obedience to
the superiors, to the authorities, to the parents, to the teachers; care
for the lowly, for the children and for the inferiors; gentleness, a
sincere heart toward all, the unceasing effort to help all whom they
know to be in need of their help 2c. And even these supreme works of
love they practice without

great stir and splendid splendor, with the greatest readiness of heart,
in all places and at all times, without ceasing.

4 Thus the church lives in the world hidden and concealed. For the world
has eyes that are so enchanted by the appearance of outward works that
they cannot look at these true works. It has much to do with caps and
plates; it looks at these, these alone it admires and worships, before
these it cannot see the true fruits of faith. But because the church has
no special observance of prayers, fasting, clothing, and disguise of the
face, she is considered a sinner. But those are considered saints who
live in a corner in solitude, frown, wear bad clothes, look gaunt, ugly
and foul. This figure attracts the eyes of the world that it cannot see
the holy works of the church.

Therefore it seems to be a desert and wasteland, uncultivated in the
sight of the world, but in the sight of God it is a well-cultivated
field, which is not cultivated by our works, but by the word and by the
gifts of the Holy Spirit, on which the sweetest fruit grows, to the
sweet smell of God. Thus he speaks here of the spiritual riches of which
Paul speaks in Eph. 1, 3. 8. and elsewhere.

V. 2. **For the glory of Lebanon is given to her.**

All the gifts that the synagogue had have been transferred to the
church, which was gathered from the rest of the Jews and from the
Gentiles. For \"the glory\" is the kingdom and the priesthood, and what
else was given to the synagogue by God; all this has come to us. And
although the Jews among the Gentiles do not see this, yet we who have
these gifts, namely, the Word, wisdom, knowledge, godliness, and in sum,
the Holy Spirit with all His gifts, and all the opened and revealed
Scriptures, know and experience it.

**They see the glory of the Lord.**

7\) This is the glory of the church, to see the Lord as it is in another
place.

420 **XXLI, 345-347.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 35, 2. 3.
**W. VI, 657-K6Ü.** 421

means: \"Whoever wants to boast, let him boast that he knows and knows
me\" \[Jer. 9, 24. 1 Cor. 1, 31.\]. Therefore, Paul and Peter very
gloriously expound the doctrine of the knowledge of Christ, exhorting us
to grow in it 2c.

V. 3. **Strengthen the weary hands.**

Here the prophet adds a consolation, so the previous words cannot be
understood of a fleshly glory, but of the glory that is hidden under the
cross and foolishness. For we must be fools, weak, and an abomination in
the sight of the world, as 1 Cor. 4, 13. and 1 Cor. 15, 30. and in the
letter to the Hebrews Cap. 11, 35. ff. is written 2c. For every one has
his plague: the one is killed, the other is driven into misery, the
third has his goods taken away 2c. So today at least we must be fools,
weak, and a mockery of the world, as Christ says, \"Ye shall be hated of
all men\" \[Matt. 10:22\]. But this is a great misery, to suffer death
in such a way, one\'s and others\' sins, the hatred of Satan and the
world. For the world considers us to be a plague and a malignant sore,
and that it cannot be unharmed unless it devours us and removes us from
the way in every way it can. Therefore Paul calls himself a χά&σ*.ρμα*
\[\"a curse of the world\", 1 Cor. 4, 13.\], that is, such an evil that
must be atoned for, and this cannot be done otherwise than with our
death. If this has happened to the apostle, what wonder, even if our
name is obscene in the eyes of the world and highly detested by it.
Therefore it happens that one is killed by fire, the other by water, not
because of adultery or other such gross vices, which the world cannot
bring upon us, but because we bear the name of Christ and follow his
words.

\(9\) Since the church is so crucified according to the flesh, the
prophet adds the consolation that the joy of the soul may overcome the
pain of the body. Therefore he exhorts: \"Well, it is true, if one looks
at the outward appearance, you are a desolation; but do not grow weary,
turn to the outward appearance.

your gifts. For since the devil does not cease his attacks, neither do
you cease praying and comforting.

**And refreshes the stumbling knees.**

10\. use the means to strengthen the weary hands, and to refresh the
stumbling knees, which are already inclined to fall. Do not become
weary, use the word, and straighten up 2c. Accordingly, it is a command
to the church to endure temptation and not to despair. For Satan tempts
the godly in two ways. First, by storm, to devour them, as it were, in
one bite. Thus he often attacks each one of us, that he may bring us
from faith and hope to sadness and despair. When he finds his heart
fixed on the Word, he runs against a hard stone, as it were, and does
not succeed in his attempt. So he goes another way, and if he has not
succeeded by force and storm, he turns to cunning, and stops with the
plague, as Cyprian writes of some martyrs that they were tormented with
slow tortures, and since they wanted to die, they were not allowed to
die.

Satan also uses this trick against the saints, and if he cannot
overthrow them by force, he overpowers them by making them tired so that
they succumb. This is the most overwhelming kind of challenge, when he
tries to overcome us in this way by ceaselessly stopping us. ^k^) Then
we must unite our forces and pray diligently for those who are in danger
in this difficult battle, one for the other. For he is such an adversary
that he will not let the one he has once seized out of his hands again,
and will not stop pursuing until the enemy is down. Here a Christian
must fortify himself with the word, and say: Even if I have to stand in
the encounter for a hundred years, I will not retreat. If you will tire
me with constant perseverance, my Christ will be the more and the more
zealous.

k\) From here to § 13 in \<4. the edition of 1532 has only the
following: Therefore this consolation is necessary, which the prophet
uses here, because otherwise the faithful would be overcome and perish.

422 L. XXII, 347-349. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 660-662.
423

I will continue to be strengthened with His power so that I will not
fall short.

\(12\) Therefore the prophet exhorts, \"Restore the knees that
stumble,\" as if to say, \"He is an idle spirit who does not trouble
himself with anything else but to challenge the church. Therefore, do
not become weary because of his perseverance; hope for help, straighten
up through the Word. You will not be delivered quickly; you must wait
for salvation. \"It is a matter of perseverance\"; only endure the
enemy, and be strong in faith, and you will triumph. If you want an
example, look at what has happened in the last twelve years. We have
been assaulted in so many ways, with violence and cunning, that it seems
incredible to anyone who thinks about it. How many schools and teachers
have stood up and written against us! How many princes have sought to
destroy the Word with the sword! But after the war with the pope was
over, many and innumerable heretics arose. When these are subdued,
others will follow. Thus, one army always follows another, and they all
seek to do us violence.

\(13\) But Satan, with all his persistent temptations, seeks only to
corrupt the glory of the Lord, that is, either to obscure or to take
away altogether the knowledge of Christ, which we have and receive
through the word. \"It is all about the word.\" It is the word of God
that is important; when this is gone, he knows that he will triumph. For
this reason we are also challenged, each one separately, by weakness of
faith, by sense of sin, by scrupulis, by excess of poverty, by lust, by
avarice, by pride 2c. Thus he does not rest from especially and publicly
assailing the church. The Holy Spirit knows this, therefore He comforts
with kind and fatherly words, so that we may be lifted up by the Word of
God, so that, just as Satan is puffed up against us, so also we may be
puffed up against Satan, not on our strength or righteousness, but on
the Word of God. Therefore, the prophet reminds:

V. 4. **Tell the despondent hearts. ^l^)**

14 This is to those who cannot endure because they have become
fainthearted by stopping the enemy and want to flee from the devil.

**Be of good cheer.**

But how? or from where? Certainly through the Word alone, which is truly
a power of God that sets believers free and saves them. Therefore, in
times of temptation, we must be guarded with the word of God, so that we
hold fast such sayings: \"He who is in us is greater than he who is in
the world\" \[1 John 4:4\]; likewise: \"Be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world\" \[John 16:33\]. When the heart takes hold of such a
saying, it is strengthened to such an extent that it says: \"Even if a
thousand devils were one, and one a thousand, yet my Christ lives and
triumphs, and is greater than all devils. But the power of such
consolations is felt by those who are in the pains of death or in
prison. But those who are safe, and are out of temptation, can have no
taste of this divine power.

16\. But it should be noted that no other consolation can or should be
held out to the souls thus frightened than the word of God. For in such
dangers no comfort of the flesh is sufficient. Therefore, the prophet
himself puts the words of comfort

l\) From here to § 23 inet, the 1532 edition has only the following:
\"Say to the despondent hearts: Be of good cheer.\" This is an
absolutely necessary consolation. For in the church there is no
beautiful appearance, but it is hated and despised, is also punished
with penalties and crosses, is depressed by its own weakness, sometimes
it also sins and lacks, then it is also made weary by the devil, who
continually devises new arts with which he wants to catch it. Therefore
he exhorts them to patience: they will surely be snatched out and saved;
it will not be an eternal trial. But we are to remember that it was
commanded from heaven, \"Be of good cheer,\" 1) so that we may not
despair. He says, \"A great thing is happening to you. Your enemy is
mighty and persevering, but he who is in you is greater than he who is
in the world, he will avenge you 2c. So the godly have nothing to
comfort themselves with but the word by which hope and faith are
nourished and sustained.

1\) In the text: oonsolainilli, for which Wohl eonkortainiin should be
read.

**\
**424 **XXII. 34S-3W.** Brief Interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 35, 4.
**W.** vi, **662-\"65.** 425

so that the afflicted may be comforted and strengthened. This is
commanded by the Holy Spirit, this is commanded and spoken by God the
Father and the Son. Therefore, you who hear this voice of God, obey it,
and contradict Satan, who reproaches you with the opposite, namely:
Despair; with God you have no salvation 2c.

**Behold, your God who comes for vengeance.**

17\. he indicates that our Lord Jesus is absent and postpones the help.
For he speaks \[in Hebrew and Latin\] in the future tense: He will bring
retribution, will come, will help 2c. But these are words of promise
with which he indicates that we are in the midst of the enemies who
condemn all the word and our teaching as the most harmful heresies, and
repay us for the highest good deeds by which we want to save them, and
to be saved in body and soul, with the greatest evil deeds, since they,
like their eyes, should hold us dear and valuable, as Gal. 4:15, 1)
says. But this is the raging injustice of the world, that it condemns
and kills Him who is its Savior and Father. But fathers and saviors are
the faithful teachers of the churches, as Paul also calls those whom he
has instructed in the faith his children \[1 Cor. 4:14, 15\].

18 It is now clear that the world is truly the devil\'s kingdom, because
it cannot suffer the benefits of salvation and life, but rewards them
with death. The Holy Spirit sees this, how horrible and grave these sins
are. Therefore he exhorts: \"Do not be afraid, do not be afraid, and do
not avenge yourselves, but leave the vengeance to your Lord, who will
come and punish your enemies in such a way that he will save you and set
you free.

\(19\) This is what happened in the church, which at the beginning
wanted to suppress the Roman Empire, but it itself was suppressed. This
is what Satan tried to do through the pope, but the pope fell. Today he
tries the same through the sects and heretics, but they perish, but
\"the word of the Lord endures forever\" \[Is 40:8\]. Thus

1\) In the editions: 1 OorintU. 4. due to confusion with the place
following the same.

Our Savior always comes to avenge us before the enemies can carry out
their plan.

\(20\) Therefore, this is a glorious and excellent consolation when we
consider the circumstances: first, the arts and thoughts of the devil,
who assails us in many ways until we grow weary and succumb. Here we are
to be prepared, thinking that his tyranny will not be everlasting, but
that Christ will come as an avenger and a savior.

21\) Secondly, you must also see that this is a command from God from
heaven: \"Be of good cheer, 2) do not be afraid. You have a great enemy,
but I promise you that the Lord will avenge you; the attacks of the
enemy will not succeed, but you will be pulled out and saved, just keep
the word and do the same; persevere in the word.

22 Thirdly, the fact that the church has no appearance of beauty is also
a great grievance, for it is not respectable by works of wisdom, but by
works of foolishness. It is regarded as heretical and without glory;
therefore it is detestable even by name. Then it is afflicted with
punishments; it is deprived of life, liberty and the use of all things.
Moreover, she is also especially oppressed by her own iniquity and sins;
she often makes mistakes out of weakness. When this happens, the devil
comes and makes these sins so great that her knees stumble.

23 This enemy is exceedingly powerful and unbearable because of his many
arts and because of his tireless persistence. That is why Paul calls him
1 Thess. 3, 5. and Matthew Cap. 4, 3. call him πεφάζοντα \[a deceiver\].

The reason for this is that he never lets go of the temptation, but
constantly thinks up new dangers and new deceptions into which he may
lead us. If he is overcome once, he soon comes again and challenges us
to a new kind of quarrel. For this reason we must also strive, because
the dispute is so unequal, to be armed with divine weapons, with the
word, with the

2\) Again, probably LOnkortarnirU should be read instead ofsolamini.

426 L. XXII, 352-354. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 665-867.
427

To meet him with faith and prayer, so that we will not be taken unawares
by deceit, and succumb.

**V. 5, 6: Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened.**

24\. at that time, when the wilderness shall flourish, and the church
shall be built under contempt, these miracles shall be seen. For they
also happened according to the letter, Matth. 11, 5. and Marc. 16, 17.
f. For the miracles were necessary in the first church to strengthen the
faith of the martyrs, who, besides other gifts of the Holy Spirit, were
also strengthened by the miracles. And because the apostles brought
forth a new word, by which the entire previous worship of the Jews,
established by God, was overthrown, and the appearance of the church was
otherwise despised, this glory of miracles was necessary, which in our
time no longer happens, because Christ is weak until the end of the
world.

\(25\) Now some lovely people laugh at us, who make of the whole
religion only a game and a joke, and reproach us that the Lutherans have
not even made a lame horse well, and that we do not have this gift of
miracles at all. But it is written: \"The wicked shall not see the glory
of God\" \[Is 26:10\]. For even today the blind again see, when souls
possessed by Satan are brought to the knowledge of Christ. The deaf hear
the gospel; the lame, who sat in their superstition, and the idolaters
leap up with uplifted faith and walk sweetly. For Elijah also calls the
idolaters limpers \[1 Kings 18:21\]. Even the mute now sing and praise
the praise of God. Those who are not moved by these miracles would not
even believe Christ if he performed these miracles in the flesh, for
they are no less than raising the dead or giving sight to the blind.

m\) § 24 reads in the edition of 1532: This is also fulfilled according
to the letter, Matth. 11, 5. and Marc. 16, 17. f. For these miracles
were necessary in the first church, which, although it otherwise had the
most despised appearance, nevertheless abolished the law and the entire
service of the people of God.

**For there will be water in the desert from time to time.**

26 That is, the deserts, where before all things lay uncultivated and
desolate, shall be very pleasant, because rivers shall flow in them from
time to time. That is, the dry hearts of the heathen will be watered
with the word of the gospel and begin to live. So we have such a little
stream here in Wittenberg, by which also the neighboring Oerter are
watered. For the word is the heavenly wisdom, from which springs a river
that flows into eternal life, John 4:14. Therefore, the prophet
indicates by this image that the word will be preached abundantly, and
will be spread further and further, and from the church, which is in one
place, many others will draw the word 2c.

**V. 7. Since the serpents lay before.**

He calls the godless teachers \"serpents. Where these dwelt before,
there shall be a merry fruitfulness and an abundance of water 2c. Thus
in some monasteries, where before the greatest blasphemies were going
on, now the word is taught.

**V. 8. and there will be a railroad there.**

28 As if to say: There will be other ways that will be praised under the
name of holiness. But this alone will be the holy way on which the holy
patriarchs also walked. This way is faith in Jesus Christ, the seed
promised to Adam and Abraham. All this is said by the prophet so that we
may learn that faith follows the word, and that believers cannot err.
For all things are pure to the pure. Then faith naturally gives birth to
good works. But the ungodly can neither believe nor do good works; they
only produce illusory images of good works. Therefore he says, \"No
unclean person shall perish.\" For out of all other ways are the wicked.
Thus under the cap is a godless monk 2c. But faith in Christ alone is
the way which no ungodly man takes, because the members of Christ cannot
be unclean, for they have one head which sanctifies.

**428** \^n, W4-W6. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 35, 8-10. W.
vr, 667-675. **429**

**That even the fools may not err.**

The way will be so smooth that not even fools will stray on it. But he
calls \"fools\" those who cling to the word with a simple heart. For
these the world calls and considers fools.

**V. 9. There will be no lion there.**

\(30\) That is, the teachers of the statutes of men, and the oppressors
of the law, which tear the wretched consciences asunder, shall not be
there. For believing in Christ, and trusting in him, is the only and
right way, in which one may walk safely. In other ways consciences are
torn as much as the works in which one trusts. For works tear asunder,
but faith unites.

**V. 10. The redeemed of the Lord will return.**

That is, they will live in the highest freedom and security. For those
who rightly understand Christ, no ordinance of man can take them
captive. They are free, not according to the flesh, but according to
conscience. Therefore, no law, not even the divine law, can demand any
work from believers as necessary for salvation. For if faith in Christ
justifies, it follows that no works of faith are necessary for
salvation.

Therefore, even the law will not accuse us if something has been omitted
or committed by us. This freedom is in the conscience; but the body and
our old man is subject to all laws.

32 Therefore, one must carefully distinguish between the righteousness
of faith, which is free and not subservient to any tutelage of the law,
and the righteousness of works, which is subservient to all. And no one
has this freedom but \"the redeemed of the Lord,\" who have not redeemed
themselves, but have been redeemed with the ransom of the Lord, having
been sold under sin and given over to death. As Peter also says: \"You
have been redeemed with the precious blood\" 2c. \[1 Pet. 1, 19.\], not
by our righteousness, or by our merits. Thus delivered and redeemed,
they will return from sin, from the law, and from death, to Zion, with
everlasting praise and joy that will be over their head. Hence Paul\'s
words, \"Rejoice, and again I say, rejoice,\" 2c. \[Phil. 4, 4.\]
Likewise, \"The fruit of the Spirit is joy, peace\" 2c. \[Gal. 5:22\]
Those who are sorrowful either have no faith or are weak in faith. For
eternal life begins here in faith, which we shall feel perfectly when
this present nature is past, amen.

**The Thirty-Sixth Chapter.**

This chapter is clear and explicit, because it contains a simple
narration of the story of how Sanherib besieged Jerusalem. But the
reader must be reminded here not to be too careless in the treatment of
history, following the example of Origen, Jerome, and others, and,
because such things are told that happened long ago, not to think that
there is nothing in them but secret interpretation that we can make use
of. But the author of the letter to the Hebrews shows another use of the
histories

as he draws all the histories of this people to faith. \"By faith,\" he
says \[Heb. 11:33.\], \"they conquered kingdoms. \"2c. We follow this
rule here also. But those who delight in secret interpretations, and set
aside history, hunt only chaff and husks. 1) For the use of the secret
interpretations is no other than that they serve for adornment and that
the

1\) Instead of aesrss in the editions, acern (from i neu\", netzrik)
must be read.

**430** L. XXII, 3S6-35S. Interpretations about the prophets. W. VI,
67S-S7S. **431**

The history of the world is of immense importance for increasing and
strengthening the faith. The histories, however, have an immense
importance for increasing and strengthening the faith.

In this present history, one must therefore mainly look at the faith,
which struggles fiercely and almost succumbs. But since it is very close
to falling, God\'s help comes and saves those who are in danger. By this
example we are also reminded that we should learn to hold on to hope all
the more tenaciously when there is the least hope in danger. For this is
called \"believing in hope when there is nothing to hope for\" \[Rom.
4:18\]. For \"GOD is a helper in due time\" \[Ps. 9, 10. Vulg.\] and
\"his power is mighty in the weak\" \[2 Cor. 12, 9.\]. So also the
weakness of Christians is the highest strength. Again, the unbelievers
who afflict the godly come to fall just when they have victory in their
hands, as we see in Sanherib\.... Therefore, neither our weakness nor
the power of the adversaries should cause us to despair in danger;
rather, we should encourage ourselves to believe and, because we are
very close to destruction and the enemies are very close to victory, we
should believe that God will pull us out, who has promised that He is
the kind of God who exalts the lowly and humbles the high.

But this is easier said than done, so stubbornly does the flesh and the
judgment of reason resist it. For the flesh cannot turn away its eyes
from the present danger and cannot imagine salvation, which is nowhere
to be seen but in the mere word of God, who promises that he is a savior
in due time. This is why flesh and blood cannot rise to faith, which has
to do with things that are not seen, but is only based on the present
and is moved by it.

Furthermore, if one carefully observes the circumstances, they will
greatly praise the faith of Hezekiah and the other believers. First,
look at the person who is covering the land with war. It is the ruler of
the whole world, the king of Assyria, the

attacked the city of Jerusalem. But he was puffed up by the unbelievable
success of manifold victories, which extraordinarily depressed the
courage of the besieged. He had captured the ten tribes of Israel and
led them away to Media. In addition, the cities of Judah were before his
eyes, which were miserably plundered. In short, compared to the king of
Assyria, Hezekiah was, as it were, a real king of dirt.

Then Satan added to these thoughts: \"What will you do, you who are
alone? Do you think that there were no holy people in the ten tribes of
Israel? Are you alone holy? But even in your kingdom many of them, who
were holy and not tainted with any idolatry, were captured and laid
waste. God has abandoned them. Faith and holiness were of no use to
them, nothing of the right worship, nothing that they were the seed of
Abraham. Thus Satan, with One arrow that he shot into the heart of
Hezekiah, nullified all the promises and trust in the promises: If God
had looked upon the seed of Abraham, He would also have looked upon the
kingdom of Israel and the cities of Judah. But as they were forsaken by
God, so He will also forsake you; it is in vain that you promise
yourself help 2c. For Satan\'s purpose is to snatch from us the word,
faith and prayer, so that when he has snatched from us these weapons of
ours, we may be exposed to his harm and tyranny.

In this way, one must first look at the faith in the histories with all
the secondary circumstances. If someone paid careful attention to these,
he would see that this history is not less than the one that took place
at the Red Sea. For the faith of Hezekiah and Isaiah alone defeated this
exceedingly powerful enemy.

**V. 1. Sanherib, the king of Assyria, went up.**

Here one must pay attention to all the thunderbolts that fight against
faith. The first is that he says this king is coming up against Judah.
Here this comes to the mind of the godly: He goes up against us! Why
does the Lord not stop him?

**432** L. xxn, M-zgi. Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 36, 1. 4. 6.
7. W. vi, 67S-682. **433**

For his allowing him to come out is a sign that he will not stand by us,
but will leave us. The name is also ominous, for \"Sanherib\" means \"a
thief of shrubs,\" a desolator who comes out of the bushes.

V. 4. **And Radsake said to them.**

Now follow the blasphemies, which are well understood by those who have
been in prison for a while and who have been challenged by the spirit of
blasphemy. He makes all difficulties exceedingly great with pompous
words in order to overthrow faith. For the devil is not satisfied when
he has taken the life of the body, unless he also takes away the faith
and the word of life and promises. But it is very useful to know this in
the time of temptation, so that we may know the nature of Satan\'s
tongue, with which he speaks into the heart of the godly in order to
overthrow them.

**Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria.**

He starts with a commandment. He speaks this as if he were God. But
right at the beginning he makes a very significant and annoying
comparison between the great and the small king, and presents the whole
army power of the enemies as it were before the eyes and visible. \"The
great king,\" he speaks, as if to say: If you compare your little king
(regulum) with him, he will hardly be a bailiff (satrapa). Similarly, he
says, \"The king of Assyria,\" by whose forces Israel was previously
devastated and carried away. Here reason immediately concludes: There is
no comparison between the small and the great king, therefore it is done
with us.

**What is this defiance?**

This is a strong reason of proof, based on the fact that everything is
sufficiently indicated (a sufficienti enumeratione), by which he takes
away all confidence from Hezekiah. Thou hearest how great is the power
of our king, and hast experienced it; in what then dost thou trust that
thou darest oppose him? On your teams, perhaps? But they are nothing

compared to ours. Are you relying on Egypt\'s auxiliary troops? But even
they could not help you. Do you trust in God? But he hates you. So there
is no help available anywhere. This is really the devil\'s tongue, and
not Rabshakeh\'s words, but the devil himself, with which he assaults
not the walls of the city, but the innermost marrow of Hezekiah, that
is, his extremely tender faith, in the part where it is weakest. For
this is what Satan is wont to do. He does not challenge a minister of
the word because of his profession, but looks around to see if a very
small affliction might not cause offense; he presses on this so hard,
and makes it so great, that he also depresses and obscures all good
works. Thus he says here that God is angry with Hezekiah because of the
destruction of the altars of the idols.

V. 6. Do **you rely on the broken reed stick of Egypt?**

As I have said, he takes away the carnal help that reason would gladly
allow. But here Satan has slipped out an excellent description of the
human help and the carnal protection. For he compares it to the pipe,
which is beautiful to look at but weak. Thus the arm of flesh arouses
great hope by its beautiful appearance, but it is deceptive, and its end
is ruin and disgrace. Therefore, we should base ourselves on the Word
alone, otherwise we will fall like those who lean on a reed.

**V. 7 But do you mean to say to me, \"We rely on the Lord our God?**

We see that the prophet has worked earnestly with many sermons to make
the heart of Hezekiah firm by the word that he should believe God and
trust in him. Against this faith, which is like a brazen wall, Satan
attacks here with a mighty wall-breaker. He says: You have less help to
expect from God than from yourself or from Pharaoh. I prove it like
this:

**Is it not he whose high places and altars Hezekiah has taken away?**

**\
**434 L. XXII, 361-363. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 682-686.
435

As if to say: Hezekiah has an angry God who neither wants to help him
nor can help him, and even if he could help him, he would not want to
help him. For Hezekiah is a ruin to this innocent people, and contends
against his God, and challenges the majesty against himself. This is the
utmost and highest battle of faith. But here you must notice the
artifice in slandering, that he twists the best work of Hezekiah as if
it were the highest (ungodliness. As if he wanted to say: You have
sinned grievously, that you have destroyed the high places and broken
the altars. For do you think that people are so foolish that they should
worship stones or wood? All these people have worshipped the true God.
Therefore, you have rejected his worship. This is a very serious
challenge with which Satan attacks faith, that it should begin to doubt
what it has done. When this happens, it is over. But we must not think
that Hezekiah alone was struck by these devilish calumnies. For how many
people do you think there are today who, because they are without the
Word, are sometimes challenged about the monasteries being abandoned,
the masses being stopped, and other abominations of the priesthood being
done away with? Therefore, the hearts must be well fortified with the
word of God, so that they can again reproach Satan for the exceedingly
great blasphemy and ungodliness that the Pabstacy has established: that
the death of Christ and the merit of Christ are entirely abolished, and
\[this merit\] is attributed to a filthy cap and other works done
without the command of God.

V. 8. **Come now, accept it with my Lord.**

Here he comes back to the first part about trusting in one\'s own
strength. Well, let us try the matter. I will give you two thousand
horses, and you will see that you lack horsemen for them. Why then do
you oppose our king, since you cannot even be like one of his captains?

**V. 9. and you rely on Egypt.**

This is a bitter mockery. Let it be the same that the Egyptian would be
more powerful than

we, nevertheless, have a gracious God. Thus, he mainly insists on this:
God does not want to help you, God is angry with you. Satan holds the
same word against Christ on the cross \[Matth. 27, 43\]: \"God now
redeems him, lusts after him.\" But here the heart must be strengthened
by faith in Christ, so that we think: \"Even though I have sinned, God
does not hate me and is not angry with me. Christ has reconciled me to
him through his death, he has forgiven my sins, he has given me his
merits and his righteousness 2c. This faith overcomes in temptation and
triumphs. Because Satan knows this, he sets himself so earnestly against
it.

Therefore, such passages must be carefully considered, so that we may
see in how many ways Satan attacks the conscience, so that when we are
particularly (privately) challenged, we may be reminded and fortified by
these examples to recognize Satan\'s arrows. For one part of victory is
to know one\'s enemy, and it is by this that Satan does the most harm,
in that the weak conscience, tormented and frightened by the fear of
punishment and the multitude of sins, cannot firmly believe that it is
Satan who gives the thoughts of despair, but believes that God is angry,
and cannot easily be dissuaded from this thought.

Thus he does not call Hezekiah a bad sinner, a thief or an adulterer,
but an enemy of God and guilty in the highest degree, a blasphemer and
despiser of God. In this way, he manages to find nothing in himself but
the worst, namely the greatest sins against the first and second
commandments. Secondly, he ascribes holiness to himself and says that he
was called by God to be a scourge. From this you can see what Paul means
when he says sEph. 6, 16.\]: \"The fiery darts of the wicked.\"

Now here is a great danger for the conscience. Dear one, what is to be
done when faith, which should overcome temptation and sins, is thus
challenged? First of all, we must not agree with Satan, who puts such
blasphemous thoughts into our minds, but, even though he may be

**436** \>2- xxn, Brief Interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 36, 9. 11. W. vi,
686-688. **437**

accuses us of being sinners, but with certainty of faith resist his
slander, with which he insults the faith and our profession and our good
works, as when he accuses us of the doctrine, saying that the doctrine
is evil because so many aversions have arisen from it. Here the heart
should resist and, even though many offences have arisen from it, firmly
hold that this has not happened through the fault of doctrine (which is
holy and is God\'s word, not ours), but of men. We have therefore taught
rightly from the gospel, even though many have misused it.

But how? if the things which Satan accuses you of are such that you
cannot deny them, yes, even in truth they are sins, and you have
committed them, as when David is challenged for adultery, Peter for
denying Christ? Here are two witnesses that convict us, namely the law
of GOD and the conscience, and it is not possible for me to deny sin.
Therefore, if I confess that I have sinned here, the punishment is
there, namely eternal death, which the law threatens, and Satan is
intent on bringing us to despair like Cain and Judas. In this extreme
danger it is necessary that God\'s help be there.

Therefore, either a brother must be with you to comfort you with the
word of God and take away the despair through the divine promise, or the
Holy Spirit must hold the word of promise before you in your heart and
speak it: You have confessed and not denied. Satan has wrested from you
the confession of sin, that you have done evil and deserve eternal
death, as Judas did; but do not follow Judas, straighten up, and look
here at Christ, as Peter did, and see what Christ suffered for you. For
Christ has blotted out \[Col. 2:14\] and nullified this confession of
yours and that sad handwriting with his blood, so that your sins,
however great they may be, atoned for by his blood, cannot harm you, if
you only believe this with firm faith. For if you were apart from
Christ, you would have nothing to defend yourself against sin and Satan.

But now, because you are in Christ and call upon him, sealed with his
baptism, the confession of sin is changed into a denial of it, so that
you can also stand up against Satan and boast against him and say:
Though I am a sinner, yet am I not a sinner. I am a sinner for my own
sake and apart from Christ, but in Christ and apart from me I am not a
sinner, because by his holy blood he has taken away all my sins. This I
believe for certain; for this I am baptized and absolved by the word and
fed with the sacrament of his body and blood as a certain sign of the
forgiveness of sins, which is earned by the blood of Christ 2c.

Therefore, the heart must be fortified in such a way that, although you
have sinned as your conscience accuses you, you do not despair because
of it, but when it has come to the point that you must agree with the
accusation of conscience, then the struggle (paroxysm) of conscience has
come to the highest. For it is a great thing to persevere in this
battle, which reason and the flesh cannot endure, but it is the gift of
the Holy Spirit who fortifies and encourages our hearts by His
inspiration, so that we do not consent to the accusation of Satan or our
conscience in such a way that we despair because of it.

Thus, when we are challenged about doctrine, he strengthens us to firmly
believe that our doctrine is true. If we still have some private sins,
we include them in the holy Our Father and pray: \"Forgive us our
trespasses. In this way Satan is overcome and goes away. Thus Satan is
described here very well, who is overcome when we put aside all these
words and things with which he attacks us, when we stand firm and say
\[Ps. 9:12\]: \"The Lord dwells in Zion.\"

**V. 11. Dear one, speak to your servants in Syriac.**

This is an excellent passage, which contains a very great lesson on how
we should conduct ourselves in temptations. For since Eliakim

438 L. XXII, 366-Ä68. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 689-692.
439

and Sebena take the advice to pacify Rabshakeh, and think that he will
be alleviated if they humble themselves and condescend before him, they
are completely mistaken. For in this way they only inflame him more, and
pour oil on the fire, and sharpen the tongue of Satan. Therefore
Hezekiah will also remind them later \[v. 21\] that they should not
answer the blasphemous enemy.

We should do the same in our temptations, whether we are challenged in
body or in spirit. For although reason cannot refrain from looking
around for bodily help, as the king\'s servants do here, we must
nevertheless become accustomed to it, and with the utmost diligence
guard against answering the devil or disputing with him. For I speak
from experience: the more you pursue the thoughts with which he troubles
you, the more fiercely he stands up against you, until he brings you to
despair. Behold the lesser temptations than that of unchastity,
wherewith youthful age hath most to do. For the more an impure heart
thinks of wooing, the more fiercely it is kindled and inflamed, and just
as a little spark is often kindled into a very great conflagration by
the force of the winds: so a dull desire, when set in motion, receives
power through thought. So it is with hatred, so with envy; if one thinks
very diligently of revenge, thoughts drive the human heart, as it were,
to frenzy.

Therefore, just as there is only one way to overcome these carnal
temptations, namely, to turn the heart away from the thoughts that
plague it, so there is no other advice, no other more effective help in
the spiritual struggle than to throw those thoughts out of the heart in
whatever way one can, and rather to think of other things. Although this
goes far beyond human strength, certain ways can be prescribed by which,
even if not all thoughts are overcome, they are nevertheless subdued.

The best thing, therefore, whatever temptation may trouble the heart, is
to read the

The only way to do this is to take refuge in the Holy Scriptures and in
the Word of God. But even if the heart should have no desire to read and
consider the Word of God (for Satan tries to prevent this and teaches a
disgust for reading), you must still force yourself to do so, so that,
if not the heart, then in the meantime the tongue, the ears and the eyes
may see, hear and create something different than the heart thinks. But
you will certainly feel that the heart, when the external senses are
occupied with God\'s words, will then easily come to rest.

And especially here the power and might of the word of God is seen, that
it restores the heart, which is wounded by the arrows of Satan, and
makes it finely healthy. Therefore, in the 9th chapter of Isaiah \[v.
6\], among the names of Christ is also placed this one, that he is a
\"counselor\" of the afflicted. For he comforts by the word, as he
speaks, Isa. 50:1) 4: \"The Lord hath given me a learned tongue, that I
may know how to speak in season to him that is weary.\" And Paul teaches
in his letter to the Romans Cap. 15, 4. that through the comfort of the
Scriptures hope is created and increased, which Satan in his temptations
seeks to snatch from the hearts of the godly alone. Therefore, since
there is no more effective means in temptations than to cast the
burdensome thoughts out of the heart in any way, there is only one way
to do this, namely to read the Word of God diligently. For this is the
best way to extinguish the fiery darts of the devil.

Those who do not want to follow this advice and who, with a sorrowful
heart, pursue their thoughts, do nothing but carry fuel to the
conflagration until they, wearied and overcome by Satan, who is an
artist in a thousand ways, succumb. For this one kind of battle he wages
against us, that he seeks to make our faith waver through thoughts of
divine wrath. If you call upon carnal help in this spiritual battle,
except for the word

1\) Erlanger: 59. likewise the Jenaer at the edge;

In text: 49.

**440** L. xxn, 368-371. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 36, 11. W.
vi, 6W-69S. **441**

God, then you do nothing else than that you expose yourself naked and
bare to the powerful spirit. Now, if you wish, make a comparison between
your powers and the power of Satan, and it will easily become clear how
unequal this battle is, if you want to fight with human powers and
attacks against the devil, who has won so many victories and gained so
much experience in warfare from the beginning of the world, ignoring the
word (in which only \"God\'s power\" is, Rom. 1:16).

Therefore, let go of the thoughts with which he occupies your heart, and
beware of disputing with him, for he can disguise himself as an angel of
light \[2 Cor. 11:14\] and put on the glorious robe of Christ. And
because he also knows the holy Scriptures, as can be seen from the
fourth chapter of Matthew, he sometimes uses Christ\'s own words, which
are the very sweetest, against Christ and against your faith. If you do
not turn your mind from this and say: I know no other Christ than the
one who was given to me by the Father and died for me and for my sins;
of this I know that he is not angry with me, but loves me, otherwise he
would not have taken it upon himself to die for me 2c., - if you do not
hold this against him, I say, and at the same time set about reading the
holy Scriptures diligently, you will certainly be defeated. For it is
easy for him to suffocate the weak little spark of our faith if we do
not nourish it with the word of God.

This, too, is an easy and yet necessary and useful commandment, that
sorrowful hearts should flee loneliness and hold some conversations with
friends. For conversation also serves to turn the heart away from heavy
thoughts. Therefore, being alone is especially dangerous, as he \[Eccl.
4:10\] says: \"Woe to him who is alone! If he falls, there is no other
to help him up.\" For the word of the brethren has great power, and
those who are challenged should be mindful that they hear the voices of
the brethren as the voice of God and believe them. Now, if there is no
one to teach us about God\'s word, it is still better to find some

what other people\'s speeches than to listen to Satan talking his
blasphemies and fiery darts into our hearts.

I have presented these as general rules in spiritual temptations, and
all that remains is for each one to prepare his heart against Satan in
such a way that he may feel that this counsel of ours has helped him
somewhat. For it is nothing that anyone who follows the faith in Christ
should think that he will overcome without temptations. For the word of
Paul is true \[2 Tim. 3:12\], \"All who would live godly in Christ JEsu
must suffer persecution.\" And the bodily temptations, such as poverty,
lust for fame and riches, shame and the like, are of course more easily
overcome.

But here there is effort, that is work, when Satan holds the wrath of
God before our eyes. In addition, there is also the testimony of our
conscience, which Satan then reinforces through the various examples of
divine wrath that can be found here and there in the Holy Scriptures and
which experience in everyday life presents daily. This is by far the
most difficult battle in which the devil summons all his powers and arts
and disguises himself in the image of the wrathful God. If you start to
follow your thoughts, which he himself gives you, then you are lost. And
because many people do this, we see where they end up. For they wish in
every way to be relieved of the exceedingly heavy burden of these
thoughts from the wrath of God. Therefore, they take their own lives
either by rope or by sword or in some other way. This is the end of
Satan\'s plots, and this is what he intends, that when he has torn
Christ out of our sight, he will plunge us into despair.

Therefore, one should cast the thought of sin and the wrath of God out
of one\'s heart and rather think of the opposite, as we read in the
biographies of the Fathers about a certain man. When this man, because
of a sin he had committed, was sorely afflicted with this temptation to
despair, he finally said with a confident heart, \"I have not sinned.
Not that he had denied his sin, but because he saw that he had been
saved from the sin.

4428 . xxii, 371-373. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 695-M8,
443

He said that he could not be freed from those sad thoughts in any other
way than by throwing them away and thinking the opposite. And indeed, if
he spoke these words out of trust in the death and merit of Christ, it
is an excellent example of faith, which we must imitate in such dangers,
so that we too may learn that it is not necessary to argue with Satan.
Otherwise, the weak hearts will be so overwhelmed with thoughts that
they will kill themselves. For the human heart cannot bear the wrath of
God, which Satan holds against us and drives upon us.

Therefore, whatever he may bring in, we must turn away our hearts
completely, our eyes and ears must be closed, so that we neither see nor
hear anything except the word of the promise of Christ and of the
gracious will of the Father, who gave His Son for us, as He says John
3:16: \"God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son\" 2c.
Anything that the devil may put into your heart apart from the will of
the reconciled and gracious God, throw it out as flying and useless
thoughts.

Almost the same is recalled by Gerson, who alone among the moderns has
thought of comforting troubled hearts and weak consciences; all others
in general have lived in good peace and quiet and never thought of this
matter. But he uses a wonderful simile and compares these thoughts of
the devil, with which he troubles godly hearts as with fiery arrows, to
a barking dog. If you attack it with a stone or with a sword, you
irritate it even more. The same thing, he says, happens with thoughts
when you pursue them. But as it is safest to despise a barking dog and
pass by, so there is only one way to overcome the thoughts of Satan,
namely, to despise them and no longer dispute with them; so it will
happen that they will fall out of themselves. For the more one moves
them in the heart, the more violently they penetrate, and cannot be
overcome in any way. And the devil can bear nothing less than to be
despised. That is why the whole

right, who can be strong here and despise the mischievous spirit.

This is not unlike what we read in the biographies of the fathers. When
someone had to complain that he was plagued by heavy thoughts, he
consulted a brother. He instructed him in this way: that just as
thoughts come by themselves without being fetched, so he should let them
fall away again and not pursue them. For, he said, as it is not in your
power to prevent birds from flying over your head in the air, but it is
in your power to prevent them from making a nest on your head, so you
cannot beware of devilish thoughts. Be careful that they do not take
deeper root in your heart and do not completely take over your heart.
For if that happens, you are lost. This one has given a right counsel,
and we must by all means keep to it if we do not want to get into
certain danger. For the more you dwell on your thoughts, the less you
will be able to get out of them, but rather, as if enclosed in a
labyrinth, you will never be able to wriggle out.

We see the same thing here. They want to pacify Rabshakeh in the best
way and according to the best advice, but in vain; for he only becomes
more furious. Therefore I command you this passage, so that you may know
how to counsel troubled consciences. I have seen many people who, being
very severely challenged, did not know this art of despising these
thoughts. That is why they began to rage, because their senses were
injured by the violent thoughts; some even killed themselves. But such
thoughts are a mere play of Satan. We do not produce them, but suffer
them; they are not human actions, but sufferings. Those who do not want
to learn this are doomed, for they must succumb. For the devil is such a
vicious accuser who does not tire until he has achieved victory.
Therefore, those who do not despise him, but become his spectators, to
whom he presents one spectacle after another, on whom he drives one
thought after another, until they fall to the ground.

**444** XXII, 373-376. short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 36, 11, 13,
15, 16, W. vi, 698-702. **445**

be pressed. But those who want to escape from his persecutions should
say: I will neither be your spectator nor your actor 2c. For so Christ
also reminded, Matth. 18, 3: \"Unless you become like children\" 2c. So
Rabshakeh, because he has these spectators and disputants, becomes more
defiant and angry. But Hezekiah punishes them afterward \[v. 21.\], Why
do ye answer him? 2c.

But here you see what the histories teach, and how those do not
understand anything who superficially run over it as if it were
something that does not concern us, or seek idle spiritual
interpretations. For they contain examples of the most important things.

V. 12. Do **you think that my Lord sent me to your master or to you?**

Eliakim 1) and the others consulted beautifully. Because the despondency
of the people became only larger in this way. But notice how the
presumption of Rabshakeh gradually increases. He is sure of victory, so
he threatens the extreme hardship that seemed imminent. But as I have
reminded you before: as often as the devil holds threats against you,
remember that you will surely despise them. For the examples of wrath
are written for the hopeful and stubborn. You, who are weak and already
terrified, should know that this is none of your business, and should
know that the devil and not the Holy Spirit reproaches you with this,
because it is not reproached in the right place. For the Holy Spirit
raises up the afflicted and dejected souls with his consolations and
promises. Therefore, the devil imitates the Holy Spirit, but in a wrong
way, and comforts the hardened and unintelligent (insensatos \[Gal. 3,
1.\]) with promises, but he inflicts the humble with the wrath of God
and threats.

Here it is necessary that we make a distinction between spirit and
spirit, and hold that it is not the Holy Spirit, but the devil\'s
inspirations, who wants to turn the gracious and merciful God into a
judge and angry executioner.

1\) In the editions: -loucUiin either for \"Joah\" lrmi\' Isa. 36, 3.\]
or by confusing Joachim with \"Eliakim\".

For the scripture says of God that he looks upon the lowly in heaven
\[and on earth\] and exalts them \[Ps. 113, 6. f.\]. But Satan saws that
he looketh on the high and exalteth them still more, but presseth down
and corrupteth the lowly still more. Therefore, whether he challenges us
in the highest articles of faith or in small sins, we must remember that
we must either cast out all thoughts from our hearts, or, if we want to
think anything at all, think the opposite, namely, of Christ, of grace,
of the mercy of God, of eternal life, 2c., and hold that these promises
belong to us who, frightened by sins, groan for mercy. So great and
useful is the commandment of which Paul reminds us, that one should
rightly divide the word of God \[2 Tim. 2, 15\], δρ&οτομ£ν*, in order*
that

The afflicted and fainthearted will be uplifted by the promises, while
the hard and sure will be frightened by threats.

V. 15. **And do not let Hezekiah deceive you.**

These are fierce challenges of faith. And always he presses the devilish
part (tertiam partem): Hezekiah is godless, God is angry with him 2c.
They have so irritated the devil that he now rages a hundred times more
than before.

V. 16. **Thank you.**

Finally, he entices them with promises, so that nothing is omitted that
belongs to a perfect speaker. He dwells on the best part of his cause,
so that all other evils become insignificant before the goodness of this
piece, but with his adversary he takes up a little spark and makes a
tremendous fire out of it. For this is also what Satan is wont to do: he
takes up a small sin, with which he obscures all the good works you have
ever done, so that you can see nothing else in yourself but this one
sin. But this is what happens when you dispute with him. A Christian
will therefore overcome those thoughts by contempt, because the hopeful
spirit cannot bear contempt. But for this, the Holy Spirit is needed,
and practice in prayer, and that one should

446 k. XXII, 376-378. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 702-708.
447

read the Scriptures, as we have said above, for it is not with us that
we overcome or cast away these thoughts.

V. 18. **do not let Hezekiah persuade you to say.**

He cannot forget this little piece; against this he contends, against
this he scorns and rages. How can the Lord deliver you? The punishment
is at the door. But even if God were merciful, he could not redeem you,
even if he wanted to. This is how I prove it:

**Have the gods of the heathen also saved every man his land?**

This is a conclusion from the greater to the lesser (argumentum a
majori). Many gods of the pagans have not been able to resist us, but
they have been overcome together with their worshippers: therefore, how
will your God, who is only One, be able to resist us, who is hidden like
a mouse in a dark cave? From all too great! hope and security, Satan
becomes such a fool that he denies the power of God. It is here a
perfect art of speech, and all the colors of Satan, which he uses in the
highest degree. Least of all, he can suffer faith,

Therefore he challenged him most fiercely, and Hezekiah\'s heart was
stormed far more violently than the walls of the city. So there was a
fight on the outside and fear on the inside. But that one has an angry
God in such a way and is alone and, as it were, perishes in wrath, that
is the weak Christ on the cross, who rises again on the third day and
triumphs over his enemies.

**V. 21 But they were silent and answered him nothing.**

This is a golden text that teaches us that we should not argue with the
devil. For when he sees that we are his spectators and listeners, he
takes occasion to prove himself all the more valiant, and presses all
the harder. Peter says \[1 Pet. 5, 8.\] that he goes about seeking whom
he may devour. He makes no end of his pursuits. But it is safest not to
answer, but to despise him, as the Psalm \[Ps. 4:5\] reminds us: \"If ye
be angry, sin not. Speak with your heart,\" and not with the devil. This
may be enough of history. For since Paul says \[Rom. 15:4\] that all
things are written for our sake, we must put them into use and follow
the faith which such histories indicate to us.

**The Thirty-Seventh Chapter.**

**V. 1 When Hezekiah the king heard this.**

In the previous chapter we heard that one should not argue with the
blasphemous spirit, because it only becomes more and more irritated.
Therefore, one must follow the advice of Hezekiah. The same thing
happens to us with the heretics: we fight with them, but we don\'t get
anywhere. For it is impossible to silence the devil. Therefore Paul
exhorts \[Tit. 3, 10.\] that one should avoid the heretics 1) after they
have been admonished once and again. Now the prophet continues and
describes the

1\) In Latin the object Uasrstiws is missing here.

high challenge (paroxysmum) of Hezekiah. For faith struggles at this
\"sighting\" \[Luc. 22, 31.\] of Satan and almost despairs. He confesses
that it is \"a day of blasphemy, affliction, and reproach\" \[v. 3\], as
if to say: we are defeated; today there is anguish and affliction and
blasphemy; the power of faith is defeated, Satan reigns; \"we have come
to the point of giving birth, and there is no power to give birth\" 2c.
It is not a day of patience, of counsel, of salvation, but of utter
anguish. By this Hezekiah is so utterly broken that he dare not lift up
his heart to prayer. This is the last and

**448 is. xxu, 378-381.** brief interpretation on isaiah, cap. 37, 6. 7.
15. 16. **w.** vi, **708-712. 449**

The highest stage of the challenge, therefore it is necessary that the
consolation and the victory are added, otherwise the faith would be
defeated. This is the article of which the Psalm says \[Ps. 9, 10.
Vulg.\] \"A helper in due time.\"

**V, 6. Do not be afraid of the words.**

Since there is neither counsel nor help anywhere, the word of counsel,
salvation, hope and faith is sent to strengthen him. Therefore we should
also remember that in such danger there is nowhere to look for comfort
but in the word. But there is an emphasis in the fact that he says:
\"Before words\", as if he wanted to say: \"There are words and an empty
sound, since there is nothing behind them, with which Rabshakeh wants to
frighten you and yours; I will give you another word, not an idle and
empty one, but such a one, which in a moment will bring about
destruction for the enemies and salvation for you.

**V. 7 Behold, I will change his mind.**

This is mockingly spoken (ironica), as if he wanted to say: Sanherib now
has such a hopeful spirit that neither heaven nor earth can grasp his
arrogance. But I, on the other hand, want to instill in him a spirit of
despondency, that he should flee even without being pursued, and yet not
escape. But it is a glorious faith of Isaiah that in so great
difficulties he promises salvation so surely. The king is besieged,
nowhere is an exit open, as at the Red Sea. But God has countless ways
to save. He could have surrounded the Assyrian with a brazen wall or
moved Hezekiah to another place. But he does none of these, but delivers
him by the word alone. This is written to strengthen us, so that we
learn that we must first be led into the highest despair before we feel
the help of God. This is the right kind of death, in which all human
attempts and shells fall away. But faith, though with difficulty, does
not succumb, and the more desperate everything is, the more stubbornly
it hopes until it overcomes.

**V. 15. And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying.**

Hezekiah\'s faith, strengthened by the Word, increases more and more.
Before he did not dare to pray, now he prays and refutes all the
blasphemies of the Assyrian. The power of the word is so great that he
has become a completely different man through the word that Isaiah told
him.

**V. 16. You who sit above the cherubim.**

Notice this passage, in which Hezekiah takes hold of God as God willed
and revealed that he would be taken hold of. He calls him a Cherubim God
because God had promised that he would dwell there. But it is a great
praise of Hezekiah\'s faith that he remains steadfastly in the place,
worship and service that God had appointed, and runs to the mercy seat,
not looking at the greatness of the other gods or the weakness of his
God. We, who are in the New Testament, should do the same, so that, just
as the Jews were bound to the Temple, we should look to the one Christ,
who was presented to us by the Father, and include the entire Godhead in
Him. For in Him God has revealed Himself to us.

He did not want us to investigate the majesty, so he did not present us
with the Creator of heaven or other names of the divine majesty, but
with Jesus Christ, who became man and died for us on the cross. To him
we should fix our eyes and our hearts, and not wander with idle thoughts
into heaven to the thrones of angels, as unlearned people of the
contemplative life have commanded. If we do this and cling to the one
Christ with pure faith, then the majesty will not frighten nor anger us,
but the humanity of Christ will attract us.

We should therefore abstain from majesty, and as we see that they did in
the law, so should we do after Christ is revealed. When Daniel was in
the midst of Babylon, he turned his face to the cherubim when he wanted
to pray. So shall we do from

450 D- xxn, 381-383. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 712-71.\"
451

Christum Hinblicken, und die Majesty fahren, die uns vorgestellt ist.
For our comprehension is too weak to grasp it, and God has not presented
to you a mere God, but the human form that is like you. Thither direct
thy foot and thine heart, and thou shalt not err.

**You alone are God over all the kingdoms on earth.**

This is the sure way by which we ascend to the majesty, if we have first
grasped the weakness and foolishness presented to us. Thus, he who has
learned Christ the man will gradually ascend to see the Father also, as
he says to Philip in the Gospel \[John 14:9\].

**V. 17. Lord, incline your ears, and yet hear.**

He expresses beautifully how it is to the mind of the one who sighs in
faith. For in the cross it happens in such a way that it seems to the
afflicted heart as if God were asleep, as if He neither hears nor sees
anything. With this delay and postponement of help, however, one must
take hold of the promises and, according to them, firmly believe that
God is there, that He hears and helps, even if the opposite is before
one\'s eyes. And it will happen, if you only persistently agree with the
word, that when everything seems to be in despair, suddenly hope shines
and divine help is there. Through these exercises, however, faith is
nourished and strengthened, and we learn in truth that the word of God
is a word of comfort and life. Thus it is written in the Book of Wisdom
Cap. 10, 12: \"He gave him victory in a strong battle, that he might
learn how godliness is mightier than all things.\" For by experience we
must learn how great and mighty a thing is faith, which triumphs over
all evil.

**V. 19. For they were not gods, but the work of human hands.**

This is an excellent antithesis. For he who can attach this to his
enemies as their title (praedicatum), that they are false gods, and they
serve false gods,

he has already won. But someone would like to say that also the ark of
the covenant and the cherubim were works of men. Therefore, one must
carefully note the difference that is between these and the idols of
those. An ark and cherubim could also have been made by the Gentiles,
but since they had no special commandment from God, it would have been a
godless service. But God has bound Himself by the Word to this ark and
the cherubim, and in the 2nd Book of Moses He says \[Cap. 20, 24.\]:
\"In what place I will establish the memorial of My name.\" He does not
say, In what place thou shalt establish, but I, thither shalt thou come,
there shalt thou surely find me 2c. This promise, this word, makes the
difference between the one work and the other.

**V. 20. But now, O Lord, our God.**

This is the final plea, short but significant and powerful, which
penetrates through heaven and earth. For he presents the need in such a
way that he alone seeks the glory of God, not his salvation or his
benefit.

**V. 21 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent.**

We must pay attention to this passage in order to persuade our hearts in
temptation that our prayer is answered. For God is more willing to hear
than we are to pray, as is clear from this example. Therefore, we must
also learn from it that our prayers are not in vain, but are pleasing to
God, and will certainly be heard, as Sirach also reminds us Cap. 18, 23
\[Vulg.\]: \"Before prayer prepare your soul, and do not be like a man
tempting GOD,\" that is, prepare your heart in certain confidence that
GOD will hear you, not because of your worthiness, but first, because
you are certain that GOD commands that we should pray, and that it is as
much a sin not to pray as if you commit murder or omit anything that GOD
has commanded; secondly, because God has promised that He will hear;
thirdly, because you have the word and the form of prayer that He
Himself has provided. Therefore, you need not fear that your prayer will
offend Him. This is what the \"Amen\" refers to.

**452** E, XXII, 383-386. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 37,
21-24. 26. W. VI, 716-720. **453**

The prayer is not based on your worthiness, but on the fact that God
commands it, that God has given the promise, and that God has provided
the form. He who considers this prepares his soul rightly. The monks
also give instructions on how to prepare for prayer, but these are
nothing but useless thoughts, for they do not bring any distress that is
on their necks, nor do they look at God\'s promise, but pray into the
wind and in truth tempt God.

**V. 22. The virgin daughter of Zion despises you and mocks you.**

He speaks of the future as if it were present, and of the defeated
Sanherib who is still the victor. But he uses scornful words, as they
are used by the victors against the defeated, and the enemy, who still
besieges the walls as a victor, he despises from the heart, with words
he scorns him, with gestures he mocks him. This is something
immeasurably great, if one considers the circumstances correctly. To us
it seems easy, but at that time it was extremely difficult and quite
unbelievable, since Hezekiah and his people were in distress and
expected death at any moment. But this is the way of faith, that it
absolutely puts all senses to sleep and throws itself on the mere word.
For things look quite different to the eyes than they do to the ears.
When you look at things, everything is quite different from what the
word says. Therefore, faith is the most certain certainty, which takes
hold of the word and clings to the word without considering the outward
appearance of things. Thus, in the temptations because of sin, not only
our conscience accuses us of sin, but also wood, stone, houses and all
creatures. However, in the midst of these things, a single word comes
and says: Be of good cheer. This word takes hold of faith against
conscience, the devil, hell and death, and overcomes.

Therefore, such passages are excellent testimonies of the faith that
faith is a certainty of the heart that hangs on the word alone, without
the thing that the word indicates, even if everything is opposed to the
word. Therefore you act

in the challenge most correctly, if you put the outward appearance of
the things as far as possible from the eyes and the heart. For that is
believed which is not present, and after it is believed, it is surely
fulfilled.

V. 23. **Against the saint in Israel.**

\"The holy one\" he calls the one who dwells in the tabernacle through
the word. For those who heard the word there were sanctified, believed
the word, exercised faith 2c.

**V. 24. I came up through the multitude of my chariots.**

This can be understood according to the letter of Lebanon, but I prefer
to take it figuratively, that he wants to indicate that he has taken all
of Judah and that Jerusalem alone is left, which he will also destroy in
a short time.

**V. 26. But have you not heard that I did this in the past?**

This is a double-meaning and ambiguous saying. For it can be taken in
general as if it wanted to say: I have often destroyed kings and peoples
before, that is nothing new to me, but what I will now do with you, I
have already done before with other kings, with Pharaoh, with the kings
of Canaan 2c. The special sense however is that, which actually belongs
to this history. I have long foretold how you rage against my people.
Not by your counsel but by my providence you come here and do what you
do. For I have raised you up for this purpose, that my name may be known
through your defeat. But that he says, \"I have done it before\" (a
longinquis feci), is a Hebrew way of speaking, for which we say, I
foretold long ago that this would happen. For God\'s speaking is doing.

I like this view best. For it is very excellent and completely in
accordance with Scripture (theologica), that all powers and all
dominions are pacified by God, above all the actions and the counsel of
those who preside over these dominions. Therefore, as long as they are
governed and upheld by God, they are blessed. But when they are

454 8 XXII, 386-388. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 720-724.
455

If cities begin to feel their own power and want to shape themselves,
and no longer want to be shaped by God, then they will fall. Thus we
have seen in our times that some cities have grown by great and sudden
increase, while others, which have become great and want to maintain
themselves by relying on their power and wealth, will fall. Thus the
papacy grew by God\'s permission, and no princes could resist it; but
now that it oppresses itself to maintain itself by its own power, it
falls and will fall still more. So it is with all the other ungodly. For
if the Lord ceases to work and bless, they must inevitably perish.

**V. 27. and become field grass.**

These are figurative speeches. It is my work, not yours, that the
inhabitants of the cities have become like field grass, that is, that
their courage is broken and in despair.

**V. 28. But I know your dwelling place.**

These are fierce, scornful words, which no godless man believes to be
true. For this is the speech of the wicked \[Ps. 14:1\]: \"The wicked
saith in his heart, There is no God.\" Not that they deny GOD, but the
GOD they deny who is in Jerusalem. But it is full of comfort that he
says, \"I know thy raging against me.\" As it is said in Zechariah
\[Cap. 2:8\], \"He that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his \[the
LORD of hosts\'\] eye.\"

**V.30. But this is the sign for you.**

The prophet adds a sign to the promise. In the first year, he says, the
trampled seeds and the cut grapes will be enough for you to eat. In the
second year you will not sow anything, because what fell on the earth
when you trampled it will grow by itself. In the third year you will sow
anew. But here arises the question why the prophet added the sign of the
second year. Here some answer that the greatness of the miracle would
have required \[besides the first\] another sign. For there was danger
that

The Assyrians would return in the second year. So that they would be all
the more sure, he added the sign. But I think that there is another
reason for it. For when miracles happen, they are recognized only by the
godly. The wicked, however, always minimize them and invent I do not
know what natural causes, as the astrologers are wont to do. When
someone is struck by lightning, they say: This is nothing new; the same
thing has happened many times before. They look for circumstances and
causes by which they confirm that it is a natural event, so that the
glory of the miracle is obscured. For the wicked shall not see the glory
of the Lord \[Isa. 26:10\]. Because of these foolish diminishers of the
miracles he adds the second sign. Otherwise it would have been enough of
the miracle that they should live from the trampled seeds 2c.

The secret interpretation of this passage has been treated in many ways.
The monks have even drawn it to their fictitious humility. But I have
often reminded that secret interpretations must be drawn not on life
(mores) but on faith and conscience, as you see that Paul also did.
Therefore, the desolate kingdom of Judah is not a picture of monkish
humility, but of that which the law and the feeling of divine wrath work
in the hearts of men who are free from all confidence and presumption in
human powers, so that the Assyrian is the law, but Jerusalem and the
desolate land are the conscience terrified by the law. For the law with
its army, that is, the power of sin and death, severely frightens the
conscience, making it a veritable desert. The city that is saved
afterwards means that the conscience is restored through the forgiveness
of sins, and is again cultivated and brings forth fruit. The rest that
remains are the sighs of faith, which receives strength through the
gospel, and again grows and bears fruit through teaching and doing.

Origen and Jerome do not treat the spiritual interpretations in this
way, but only make prescriptions for life out of them, which are just as
well obeyed by the pagans.

456 xxii. 388-390. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 37, 30-38. W.
vi, 724-7W. 457

can be taught. Therefore, they must rather be related to the gospel and
the law. For the movements of the heart, which are produced by the law
and the gospel, can be signified by all things, whether they be
spiritual or bodily, and in the spiritual interpretations one must aim
at the movements of the heart, not at the thing itself (materia). For
what Hezekiah suffered with his own in the flesh, we suffer spiritually.
Therefore, whether the things are the same or different, the same spirit
and the same faith are on both sides \[of Hezekiah and us\].

V. 31 **For the saved of the house of Judah.**

This is a promise from the worldly regiment and the kingdom of Judah.
Not only would Jerusalem be saved from the present danger, but Sanherib
would not return.

**V. 35. For my sake and for the sake of David my servant.**

Not for your merits, but for my sake, and because of my promises which I
made to David. For he leads David, not as an intercessor, but as the one
who has the promises. For David also pleased GOtte because of his trust
in divine mercy, not because of trust in his merits.

V. 36. **Then the angel of the Lord went out.**

The history, which he has so far so magnificently elaborated, he now
runs through in short words. He says, \"The angel smote them.\" For the
Holy Spirit describes the events briefly, but he uses many words in
exhorting and preaching. For he endeavors more to awaken the hearts than
to strike out the incidents. The historians do it quite differently.
Because

the Scripture works to build up the faith of the reader and learner, so
that he may firmly believe and trust God, a longer description of the
matter is not necessary. For since the mind and the heart are already
inflamed, the readers themselves see the greatness of the matter,
however briefly it is described.

**V. 38. His sons struck him with the sword.**

So miserably the greatest ruler in the whole world perished. He is
killed at the court, in his majesty, not by enemies, but by his
children, by his own flesh and blood. The prophet does not indicate the
cause of the patricide, but the Jews write that he asked an oracle how
he could avenge the defeat inflicted by the GOtte of the Jews. He was
told that he should sacrifice his two firstborn sons according to the
example of Abraham. Since the sons had found out about this, they had
forestalled their father\'s intention and killed their father. Although
it is uncertain whether this is true or not, it is probable, because it
was the custom of almost all pagans to offer human sacrifices. But one
should not have looked at the doings of the saints, but at their faith;
therefore they abused the doings of Abraham.

This is an example of the terrible judgment of God on those who
blaspheme God with a raging mouth and persecute His word and those who
believe the word. But our tyrants will not be moved by these examples
until they themselves experience the same. But the misfortune also flows
over to the descendants, because his sons had to live in exile. 1)

1\) Here, at the end of his work, Spalatin added a section from his own
(about half a columne), which has passed into the German editions.

[458 L- xxn, 391-393. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 729-732.
459]{.underline}

**The thirty-eighth chapter.**

When the temptation of despair on the left is overcome, the temptation
of pride on the right tends to follow, which is exceedingly difficult.
For the human mind cannot but be puffed up by prosperity; but it commits
fornication, and hangs on to the gifts of God. But there is no case more
terrible than when one boasts of spiritual things and is presumptuous
about them. For this is the case of Lucifer, by whom we fall suddenly
from heaven. In order that God may counter this inherent fault of ours,
He is compelled to hang a weight on our necks, as it were, which is to
press us, so that we will not be presumptuous and hopeful because of the
spiritual gifts of God. Therefore David, who was full of the Spirit,
fell into shameful adultery so that he would not be worthy of hope. And
Peter would have exalted himself above all angels if he had not denied
Christ. Thus Paul was given a stake in the flesh, that is, Satan\'s
angel, lest he exalt himself above high revelations \[2 Cor. 12:7\].
Even the holy virgin would not have been safe from this plague if the
sword of Simeon had not passed through her heart \[Luc. 2, 35.\]. Thus,
all Christians are burdened with the cross, so that they do not rebel
against God in hope and security.

2 Thus, in this text, the very pious king Hezekiah, after being severely
challenged with mistrust, is restored to health. Therefore, he is
cheerful and feels the gift of God; he sees that everything is going his
way, therefore he is puffed up. But in order that God may withdraw him
from this security again, he afflicts him with the plague (for I believe
that it was such a disease).

\(3\) Even the hopeful spirits of today, who boldly spread new and
dangerous doctrines among the people, lack nothing but such a disease as
Hezekiah had here. For the presumption and the

Arrogance is in truth a podagra, which mocks all physicians. Other sins,
such as murder, adultery, fornication, theft, etc., are felt; but this
presumption is a diabolical challenge in the spirit, which is not felt,
and cannot be taken away except by the sword of Simeon, or by adultery
with a Bathsheba, or by the denial of Peter, or by the angel of Satan;
otherwise it is an incurable disease.

4 Therefore we should walk in the holy scriptures with the highest
humility, and ask that Christ will give us the spirit of humility;
otherwise it is done for us. For if Paul, Peter, David and other great
people have not been safe from this monster, how will it be with us
wretched people, to whom this pitch clings so tightly that we have no
hope of being cleansed and delivered from it as long as we live here.

V. 2. 3. **Remember, O Lord.**

5 Here it is asked: Did Hezekiah boast with a clear conscience that he
walked before God in truth and with a perfect heart? But it can be
answered in a twofold way: First, in regard to the word and his office,
that the king was quite assured in his conscience that he did that which
he did according to the word of GOD, and by divine command, by which he
was called to the kingdom; as Peter saith \[1 Ep. 4:11.\], \"If any man
speak, that he speak it as the word of GOD.\" Thus one who is in the
teaching office can say that the office, as far as the word is
concerned, is holy before God. For we must be certain of our state and
profession that it is approved in God\'s word. As far as the word and
the office are concerned, Hezekiah boasts that what he did was done
according to the word of God and according to the power given by God.
For he who follows the word of God and his calling,

**460** K xxn. 3S3-S9S. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 38, 2-10.
W. vi, 732-73.\" **461**

He walks on the right path, and even though he limps or stumbles for
himself, the path is nevertheless right. So also the state and the life
is holy, although the person is not yet holy. Therefore we answer that
the consecration of life is blameless as far as the word is concerned,
but as far as the use is concerned, the weak stumble.

\(6\) Secondly, it may be answered, Hezekiah suffered the affliction
which afflicts all who are afflicted, and sought help in works. And in
this way he does not boast with truth. However, I like the former
opinion better, that he had his mind set on his ministry and on his
kingdom, which was commanded to him by God, when he says: he walked with
a perfect heart 2c.

**V. 4. 5. Behold, I will add fifteen years to your days.**

The prayer is immediately answered. Although it is weak in all the
saints, and does not know what or how much it asks, yet the Spirit
represents us with his groaning, and obtains more than has been asked.
For God does not give according to our measure, but according to His;
and this measure is divine, and inestimable, and ineffable. But such
examples should establish our hearts and our faith, so that we pray the
more diligently and with the greater zeal. The king asks to be saved
from the apparent danger of death, and behold, he is promised fifteen
years.

8\. and not only this, but also peace is promised to him before the
Assyrian, who at that time seemed to want to come again to devastate
Judah. Thus, when the church asks that the name of God be sanctified, it
asks far more than it thinks or hopes, which is evident when the prayer
is answered. However, one must not abstain from naming something certain
because of this; but the place, time and person, what, when, how,
through whom it is to be given to GOD, that must be left to Him alone.

**V. 6-8: And I will deliver thee with this city out of the hand of the
king of Assyria.**

\(9\) This promise is not to be taken from the past victory, but that
after this there would be no danger from the Assyrian as long as
Hezekiah lived.

**V. 9. This is the writing of Hezekiah.**

10 The prophet adds the song of Hezekiah, which I cannot reach for the
sake of the exceedingly high emotions of the heart; and it can be
understood, even if explained in many words, only by those who have been
in great trials.

But it has two parts. First, he tells the movements of his heart, in
which he was, since death was placed before his eyes. Second, he gives
thanks for salvation. But no passage in Scripture contains such a
detailed description of death as this one. We see many who die laughing
and despise death, just as those who are possessed by Satan do not
respect death. We have seen this in the Donatists before, and we see it
now in the Anabaptists. But Hezekiah, a man of such great faith, fell
into the greatest sadness when he saw death. Christ also asked in the
garden that the cup he had to drink might be taken from him, and sweated
a bloody sweat with pain \[Luc. 22:44\].

**V. 10. I said, \"Now I must go to the gates of hell, because my time
was up.**

The Hebrews call the grave \"hell\". Because, the holy scripture does
not determine a certain place, where the dead go. \[According to the
Vulgate it reads: Ego dixi, in dimidio dierum meorum vadam ad portas
inferni. Quaesivi residuum annorum meorum. \"I said: In the half of my
days I must go to the Hollow Gate; I sought the rest of my years.\"\]
But there is a violent movement in these words: In dimidio dierum meorum
\[\"in the half of my days\"\]. Namely, when I was at my most tranquil,
living in secure peace, having been delivered from a very great danger,
when I was hoping to restore the kingdom devastated by the Assyrians,
and to restore religion, behold, I die.

462 L. xxii, 3S5-M8. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 736-739.
463

in the middle of the run. These are words of an unprepared heart.

Furthermore, the monks have written much about the preparation for
death, but it has all come down to this: one should leave the world,
that is, go to a desert or a monastery, and there think about I don\'t
know what. But these are all vain antics. For the true preparation for
death is the practice of faith, that one knows that death, sin, hell,
Satan have been overcome and thrown to the ground by Christ crucified,
that we do not look at death as it is in and of itself, or as it appears
to us, but as it is in Christ. This beholding of the serpent of brass is
preserved for us \[Mos. 21, 9. Joh. 3, 14\]. And there can be no other
hope or way of salvation anywhere than by looking to Christ, the
conqueror, in whom death is trodden to the ground, sin is conquered,
Satan is laid low. On his cross hang the signs of victory of our
conquered enemies and tyrants. In this way, the heart can safely look at
death, and it is not frightened by the image of terror. Otherwise, to
look at death apart from Christ and to argue with it is like swimming in
the middle of the sea. Rather, get into the ship and stay on this mast
on which the signs of victory are hung. And look not to thyself, or to
thy merits, lest thou be drowned; but go out from thee, and go unto
Christ, who is the Lamb of God, and the sacrifice for our sins, who took
upon himself the sins of us all, and in his body overcame them, in whom
the devil and death were crucified. This is the true and only way to
despise death. For those who comfort the dying that death will put an
end to all the tribulations and perils of this life: this comfort is not
strong, and cannot lift up the heart in the struggle, because it seems
to them that there are still greater evils left after death.

**Since I thought to live longer.**

14\. I could have stayed alive for many more years, but suddenly I
perish by an untimely death.

**V. 11. Now I no longer have to see the Lord, yes, the Lord in the land
of the living.**

The sadness increases more and more. Others, when they are to die,
lament because of what they possess, that they must leave their wealth,
their glory, their wives and children. But this holy king is pained that
he is torn away from the service of God and from the word of God. Thus
we see that he had his highest pleasure in the service of God, namely in
a thing that is not respected in the world, even the most despised.

16 He calls \"the Lord\" that which concerns the Lord, that is, the
service of God. For as I have already reminded above \[Cap. 37, 16.\],
we are not to speculate about the divine majesty, but to gather our
fluttering and tossing thoughts into the word, as into a bundle. For he
who wants to catch the clouds by his speculation plunges into an abyss.
Therefore we are to keep to the simple word, as we see here in Hezekiah
that he desires such.

**Now I no longer have to look at the people at those who live their
time.**

17 \[Cum habitatore aetatis,\] that is, with those who live their time,
who reach their goal in life. This comparison also makes the pain
greater. Others live safely in peace, and come to the right age; I am
carried away in the middle of the race. Just as he was grieved before
that he would have to leave the service of God, so he complains here
that he would have to leave the worldly regiment that he wanted to
improve.

**V. 12. My time is gone.**

18, Generatio here means the age or duration of time. But the simile is
taken from the Arabs, who live in huts, which they always move from one
place to another. My life, he says, which I thought was fixed, is moved
from its place as if it were an Arab\'s hut.

19\. therefore Paul \[2 Cor. 5, 1.\] and Peter \[2 Ep. 1, 13. 14.\] call
our bodies

464 xxii, **3S8-4M.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 38, 12-16. W.
**vi, 739-742.** 465

\"Tents.\" For just as the tents do not remain in one place, but are
moved further and further away from their place, so also our life is
uncertain. And just as shepherds are forced to change their place when
they least want to, namely, when the storm drives them to do so, so too
our life is, as it were, a daily shifting. It may seem to be fixed and
permanent, just as a hut is very similar to a permanent house, and yet
it is moved from its place because of the storm; so too our life is
ruined by a single plague, by a small sore, by the stone, by a small
fever. 2c.

**You make it an end with me, the day before evening.**

20\. this is a great movement of the heart, which is taken from the 28th
chapter of the fifth book of Moses \[v. 66. 67.\]: In the morning I
thought that I would not live to see the evening; so in the evening I
thought that I would die before night 2c.

**V. 13 But he broke all my bones like a lion.**

2l. I cannot obtain this verse. For the fear and the trials of the heart
produce such dullness that no sensation remains in the body, as I have
heard of one who, having already been led to the place of judgment, was
set at liberty against all hope by Duke Frederick of Saxony. When the
others asked him how he had felt or what he had thought when he was led
to certain death, he answered: he had thought nothing, but it had seemed
to him as if he had had to wade through a deep mud, in which he could
hardly have made any progress under the greatest fear, hardly having
been able to drag his feet and to work his way through with the greatest
effort.

V. 14. **I whined like a crane and swallow.**

22\. I have not been able to speak a word for fear, as we see in the
dying.

**My eyes wanted to break.**

This is the last thing, that the dying turn their eyes, as it were.
Furthermore, these three pieces, the breaking of the bones, the breaking
of the eyes, and the failure of the voice, hit the body not through the
violent illness, but through the sorrow of the heart.

**Lord, I am in distress, soothe me.**

In the greatest distress, he turns to prayer. ^n^) Furthermore, whoever
can take his refuge in God in the time of distress, so that he does not
despair of grief, but sighs and prays, has overcome. He does not speak
much either, but whimpers like a crane, and is like a little smoldering
spark. Paul calls it \"inexpressible sighs\" \[Rom. 8, 26.\].

V. 15. **O, how will I speak yet that he hath promised me, and doeth
it.**

25\. for so it must be translated \[instead of: Quid dicam, aut quid
respondebit mihi, cum ipse fecerit? in the Vulgate\]. But it is a
thanksgiving for redemption. For he sets himself up with the promise
that what God has promised will certainly come to pass.

**I will shun such affliction of my soul all my days.**

I will never forget this danger from which the Lord has saved me. The
papists have misused this passage for confession, how one has to collect
the past sins again. But the unskilful people show the greatest
ignorance in the holy scripture with such citations.

V. 16: **Lord, this is how you live.**

That is, only when you promise life through your word do you live. Your
word is the true medicine by which this gland and disease is healed. Not
as if the medicine contributed nothing to the healing of the disease,
but because the healing itself lies not in the medicine and the
remedies, but in the word. For the word

n\) Instead of the preceding words, the 1532 edition has: This is the
prayer.

466 L. xxn, 4M-403. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 742-745. 467

works through the creatures and in the creatures. Thus the bread that we
eat and the wine that we drink are transformed into flesh and bones in a
short time, not by the power of these creatures or our heat, otherwise
they would also be so transformed in an oven, but because these things
are so created and ordered by the Word \[Acts 17:28\]. For by the word
we live and are preserved. But I do not want this to be understood as if
the creatures of God were nothing or should be despised, but that the
power to live is not in them, but in the Word. For that we take breath
and live, that happens through the word.

**For you let me fall asleep and made me live.**

28 \[Instead of: Corripies me, et vivificabis me\] translate: Me
dormiente vivificasti me \[By falling asleep, you have made me alive\].
This is a general saying: By sleeping, by doing nothing, you make me
alive. For so it goes with us in the whole life, by sleeping, being
quiet, being safe, everything is given to us. Nothing is given to those
who worry and grieve; as it is said in the 127th Psalm, v. 2: \"He gives
it to his friends sleeping.\" So we also live, not by virtue of our
worry, but by casting away our worry.

**V. 17. But you have warmly accepted my soul.**

\(29\) I myself wanted to be my physician and seek comfort and peace
apart from words, but the affliction of my soul has only become more
bitter; that is, I have only made the affliction worse with my attacks
until you came and embraced me, that is, until you announced the word of
life to me. Thus nothing else is accomplished by worrying, but that we
only toil the more. For help is based on God alone. Bernard interprets
this saying by a forcible explanation to the effect that peace in the
Church is a twofold persecution. For when the church is at peace, the
word is not heeded, and safe souls lose the spirit. But this is not the
real opinion of this passage.

**For you throw all my sin behind you.**

\(30\) With all bodily affliction there is also this misery, that it
troubles the conscience. For Satan is not content with afflicting the
body, but also wants to destroy the soul. When we fall into some
misfortune, the conscience accepts this as a punishment of sin, so that
body and soul are sick at the same time. For the body is severely
attacked by the disease or other evil, whatever it may be; but the soul
fights against conscience, sin, eternal death and hell, which is the
most serious. For the voice of conscience is a pool (lerna) of evils, a
Jlias of evils. It is a Cacus, a Cerberus, 1) a Furie, an Erinnie, and
what more such poetic monsters are. Overcome by this, we immediately
conclude also in bodily temptations: God is ungracious. This is an
appendage that cannot be separated from the temptations, however small
they may be. But the greater the evil with which we are burdened, the
more our conscience is afraid and the more it fears. Thus we learn at
the hour of death that hell has innumerable open gates, since otherwise
it has hardly a single gate. The good Hezekiah also complains about this
here. Therefore, the highest benefit that God can bestow is that one
feels that one\'s sins are forgiven. And they must be people like
Hercules and Christophorus, who keep the victory in this fight of the
conscience.

**V. 18. For hell does not praise you.**

This is taken from the sixth Psalm, v. 6. You do well to make me alive,
for if you did not, there would be no religion, no worship. If you did
not do this, there would be no more religion, no more worship. Now if
your praise and worship are to continue, you must have mercy, forgive,
save 2c.

**V. 19. But only those who live.**

That is, those who rely on the divine promise without worry, without
their doing, and

1\) Erlanger: Oaeus Oerderu\".

**468 L.** xxn, **4V3-405.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 38,
19-22. **W. VI, 745-748. 469**

are saved, they praise you, as I am doing now. Thus, nothing can be
repaid to God for service except gratitude, praise and adulation. For
these are our sacrifices.

**V. 20. Lord, help me, so we will sing my songs.**

The preservation of truth and worship is a gift of God. For human
activity is far too weak to preserve and protect religion. Therefore,
this song of Hezekiah is most perfect in all its parts, in which he has
summarized so many and so important things.

**V. 21. And Isaiah said to take a plaster of figs.**

These words contain a great praise and defense of the art of medicine.
For God does not want us to disrespect or despise the use of creatures.
Only the

He rejects trust in the creatures. Although it would have been easy to
heal Hezekiah with a word, he still wants to use the medicine. So he
could create the children in another way in the human body, but he uses
the women for it. Therefore, we should use things with thanksgiving, as
God created them, and only not put trust in them.

V.22. **And Hezekiah said, What a sign is this, that I should go up to
the house of the LORD!**

35 This is the word of one who rejoices greatly. What a glorious sign
this is! The divine promise has restored me to health and given me a
sign to go out to the house of the Lord, that is, to come again to
worship, to hear the word of God 2c.

**The Thirty-Ninth Chapter.**

1 This history is described a little more extensively against the
frightening monster of presumption. The Lord had preserved Hezekiah in
the beginning during the siege and the war, and afterward in his serious
illness, so that he would not fall into presumption. Nevertheless, the
old serpent has not yet been overcome, but comes again and lifts up his
head. So even we cannot be constant if God does not put us on the cross.

\(2\) Now here is seen the use of tribulation, that it killeth the
flesh, which cannot bear good days. For the faith of Hezekiah, which so
great an army of war could not overcome, is overthrown by the messengers
who came from a friendly king. Therefore we have not so great danger to
fear from our enemies as from our friends. For when they praise and
honor us to our faces, they make us puffed up and arrogant. Thus, the
good king is seen here as a

The one who is arrogant, ungrateful and does not remember the great
benefits of God is described as the one who is arrogant, ungrateful and
does not remember the great benefits of God.

If there is no other misery that should make this life hateful to us,
then at least the sins, and especially this, that one can easily fall
into presumption, should make this life hateful to us. Every age has its
infirmities. Young people are plagued by unchastity, which is hardly
eradicated by entering into matrimony. In manly age, wealth is sought
and accumulated, and there avarice grows. If a man has lived well and
honorably, has administered his office rightly, has been a good person
in authority, a good pastor, 2c., then the self-cherishing arises, which
is actually found, along with avarice, among the old. Thus our life is
not only sinful, but sin itself. In addition, there are so many other
evils. Infancy must be prepared to suffer injustice from everyone; youth
is exposed to all dangers, male old age to all dangers.

470 D. xxii, 4M-407. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 748-752.
471

subject to all diseases and afflictions; and yet the hard neck of man
cannot be broken nor subdued by so many ills. Even though we are pressed
by so many tribulations and sins, we are still proud, presumptuous, and
surely despise God and His judgment; we fall into many and grave sins.
Therefore, there is no hope that we can live in this flesh without sins,
and we have to confess: O Lord Jesus, how often and how grievously have
I sinned! You see it, I cannot see everything, forgive 2c.

4 This is the story of Hezekiah, which can give great comfort to those
who have fallen into sin, and great fear to those who are secure. For if
such a great king, after such severe trials, could not stand, neither
shall we. However, just as he was forgiven, so will we also be forgiven.

**V. 2 Hezekiah rejoiced.**

5, To rejoice is not evil, but to rejoice over a creature in such a way
that one forgets God, does not recognize His benefits, does not give Him

thanks for it, that is evil. But it is easy to fall here in good days.
Blessed are those who fear the Lord.

**V. 3-7. Behold, the time cometh, that all that is in thine house, and
that which thy fathers have gathered unto this day, shall be brought
unto Babylon.**

\(6\) Those with whom you make a covenant will rob you. Thus it is: he
who sows in the flesh shall reap in tears. The outcome of alliances has
always been such that those have done the most harm to those who
promised the other party the greatest advantage. Even if it seems to be
a small sin to let royal envoys come before him and show them his
treasures and power, it is clear enough from the punishment that it was
an exceedingly great sin, because the prophet threatens the devastation
of the whole kingdom because of it.

**V. 8. The word of the Lord is good.**

7 This confession gets him that the punishment is postponed.

**The fortieth chapter.**

This is the second part of this prophetic book. For the prophet has
divided it into two parts. The first, which we have heard so far, is
historical, and deals with the things in which the prophet himself was
present, and which he took part in, as, of the king of Assyria.
Sometimes, as he is wont to do, he has interspersed prophecies of the
kingdom of Christ and of the future downfall of the synagogue. The other
part, however, which now follows, is a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ
and of King Cyrus. It is a pure prophecy, because the prophet did not
see either of them, neither the temporal kingdom of Cyrus, nor the
spiritual kingdom of the Gospel, of which he speaks in the first four
chapters, 40. 41. 42.

and 43. Furthermore, because it is a prophecy of Christ and of the
gospel, it also relates to our lines, indeed, it actually concerns us.
Therefore, we should let it be all the more commanded to us.

**V. 1. comfort, comfort.**

2 This is a command to the apostles, who are commanded to preach a new
way. As if to say: The law has preached only terror until now, but you
comfort, change the doctrine, preach grace, mercy and forgiveness of
sins.

**My people.**

3\. there is an emphasis in the pronoun \"my\", namely that the people
are not GOt-.

472 . D. xxn, 4V7-40S. Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 40, 1. 2. W.
vi, 752-755. 473

The people who are called God\'s people according to the flesh,
according to the blood and according to the law, but who are afflicted,
oppressed, strangled, killed by the feeling of conscience and despair.
These are GOD\'s people; for GOD is a GOD of the afflicted and humble,
as he says: \"Call upon me in trouble, and I will save you\" \[Ps.
50:15\]. For the word \"comforts\" belongs only to those who are
forsaken of all comfort and are in need of consolation. These are the
empty and empty vessel that can contain grace, which those who lean on
carnal help despise, and therefore live securely. Thus, by contrast, the
word \"comforts\" must be explained.

**Says your God.**

4 There is also an emphasis here in this pronoun \"your\". As if he
wanted to say: You are not without God; God has not rejected you, as
your conscience, terrified by the sight of sins, tells you.

**V. 2. speak kindly to Jerusalem (loquimini ad cor).**

5\. loqui ad cor means to speak kind, sweet and pleasant things that the
heart likes to hear, that is, that the preaching of the Gospel responds
to the groaning of the heart.

**That their knighthood has an end.**

6 Here he explains the words of comfort and the preaching of the Gospel,
which teaches that knighthood has an end and iniquity is forgiven.

Furthermore, \"to exercise chivalry\" (militare) is as much as to take
much trouble, and to groan under the burdens and violence of the law.
And \"knighthood\" is a fearful life, as we strive to satisfy the law by
works. Otherwise, the word \"knighthood\" is taken par excellence for
the service of GOD and religion. But because the pronoun \"their\" is
added here, it actually refers to religion according to the law, that it
should cease, so that this is a word of comfort for the troubled: \"Do
not be sad; do not lose heart because of this, because you have not
given up your

Sin feels. The knighthood has an end; I announce to you the forgiveness
of sins, so that even though you sin, you may know that the
righteousness of Christ is so great that it can sustain you even in
sins. But this is said to the afflicted and the afflicted.

\(8\) Therefore, the abolition of the law is indicated here, with which
all deeds, all works, all righteousness, which is outside the
righteousness of grace, is rejected at the same time. But because the
world does not want its works and its worship to be condemned, it hates
us, calls us heretics, burns us with fire, and rages with all kinds of
corporal and life punishments against those who say that chivalry has an
end.

**For their iniquity is forgiven.**

\(9\) What do the defenders of free will and merit say here? The
foregoing part sets aside all works and deeds, all righteousness apart
from grace, as useless to merit the forgiveness of sins. But here he
promises the forgiveness of sins absolutely free of charge and by grace,
without any works. Thus the forgiveness of sins does not consist in
works, nor even in teaching or doing the law, but absolutely in the
gracious remission. And this saying must be carefully held. For when
consciences, terrified by the sight of sins and by the judgment of God,
feel the law, we should not take refuge in our doings and works. For sin
cannot be overcome by our works. So those who, out of despair, either
make vows or pilgrimages or choose a new way of life in order to
overcome the wrath of God, heap sin upon sin. A higher force, a greater
power is required to overcome sin.

\(10\) Therefore the afflicted souls must be instructed in such a way
that they first end and lay aside their knighthood, and cast away all
hope from their merit; then, that they look upon this word, \"Their
iniquity is forgiven,\" and cast themselves upon Christ, who became a
curse for us, that he might redeem us from the curse \[Gal. 3:13\], who
therefore is the one to be forgiven.

**474** xxn. E-4I2. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 755-758.
**475**

suffered and was crucified, so that, having overcome our sins, we might
live righteously in the faith, being reconciled to the Father through
the blood of the Son, and counted righteous through faith in the Son 2c.
This is our doctrine, which we know to be powerful for the edification
of consciences.

\(11\) Shall we then live without law, as free men? and shall we imagine
that our sins are given to us? Yes; one must live entirely without law,
as far as justification is concerned. For the law has an entirely
different use than that it should make righteous. For the law is to be a
disciplinarian of the body. But now those who seek righteousness by it
make it a disciplinarian of the conscience. But as far as heaven is
separated from earth, so far ought we to separate the law from the
conscience. For the law can do nothing in the conscience but terrify,
increase sin, and kill. Therefore the realm of the conscience belongs
only to grace, which presents to us Christ who suffered for us. But the
law must be referred to the body and to the outward members, that it may
be a rule and guide of outward duties. This is the true and proper use
of the law. But those who use it for justification misuse it for their
own condemnation. Because the law cannot be kept by us, it always
accuses us and frightens us. Therefore Christ is necessary, who comforts
us in this terror with his righteousness, and offers the forgiveness of
sins free of charge and by grace. Furthermore, Christ alone is grasped
through faith; therefore, faith alone frees us from the terror of the
law, satisfies the conscience, and makes us righteous.

**For she received double 1) from the hand of the Lord for all her
sin.**

Jerome falsifies this text very much by his ungodly gloss. This is how
it goes when we use the judgment of reason for the

1\) In the Vulgate, in the first edition of 1532 and in the Jena, the
correct reading is: dupllna. In the Erlanger and in the Wittenberger
(after the edition of 1534) diseiplinana.

He was able to bring to the interpretation of the Holy Scripture. For
seeing that forgiveness of sins is here thought of, he thus concluded
that sins deserve not grace, but punishment; consequently, \"twofold\"
means twofold punishment. Thus he shows that he does not know what
forgiveness of sin is, just as in another place he claims that the
forgiveness of sin is uncertain. But we take this passage from grace.
For we know that with God there is forgiveness \[Ps. 130:4\]. And
because our merits are nothing, nor can they be anything, we ask:
\"Lord, do not enter into judgment with your servant; for before you no
living person is righteous\" \[Ps. 143, 2\].

\(13\) Thus we sinners receive forgiveness of our iniquity, and the end
of our reign (for this is the twofold thing which we receive from the
hand of the Lord), not by any merit, but by pure grace, which also we
can testify by our example. For what did we do under the priest before
the light of the gospel arose? We crucified Christ, we sold him with the
abomination of the masses, we were blasphemers, we overthrew grace in
teaching and living. We have arrogated deity to ourselves because we
have tried to obtain forgiveness of sin by our works, not only for
ourselves but also for others. In sum, we have been God\'s enemies in
many and infinite ways. Shall we then boast that through our merits we
have earned this abundant grace that we now have? No. Where did we get
it from? Isaiah says, \"She has received double from the hand of the
LORD for all her sin.\" This is what the Spirit of God\'s wisdom says.
And this teaching serves extraordinarily for the praise of grace and the
glory of Christ. But the doctrine of the adversary, which ascribes the
merit of justification to works, detracts from the honor and merit of
Christ; therefore it is blasphemous and ungodly.

**V. 3. It is a voice of a preacher (clamantis).**

\(14\) What is the way to receive duality? He answers: \"It is a voice

**476** sShort interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 40, 3. W. vi, 7S8-76N
**477**

of a preacher.\" Therefore, the end of knighthood and the forgiveness of
sins cannot be obtained except through the ministry of the voice. As it
is said in the Epistle to the Romans Cap. 10, 14. \"But how shall they
believe, of whom they have heard nothing? But how shall they hear
without a preacher?\"

\(15\) Therefore these are swarming spirits, who today despise the
outward ministry of the Word, and teach, I know not what speculationes,
that in a solitary place it shall come to pass that the hearts shall
receive the Holy Ghost, that is, the spirit of the devil. But Isaiah
says here that this is the right and shortest way by which we may come
to the knowledge of grace when we hear the voice of the preacher. For
when we hear the word of God with attentive senses, then vain feelings
and thoughts cease, and in the hearts only the word that is heard
prevails. Others, who think about high things without the Word, as the
Anabaptists teach, their hearts are full of all kinds of shame and vice.
For first, it is impossible to empty the soul of all thoughts as they
demand. Therefore, if the Word of God, which they teach must be
disregarded, does not take over your heart, other idle or even wicked
thoughts will. After that, how is it possible that those can think
something holy who both do not have the Word and are not yet spiritually
dead? This is the work of the Holy Spirit and not of man. Therefore,
instruct your mind against the errors of the zealots, so that this is
the beginning and the only way to come to the knowledge of grace and the
gospel, when you hear the voice of the preachers (as the prophet says
here).

16\) Further, that he speaks a voice of a preacher, he opposes this
voice to the ministry of the law, and proclaims a new ministry, and a
new way of teaching, apart from that which has hitherto been among the
Jews, and calls it a calling voice, opposing it, as it were, to the
heavy tongue of Moses, which does not lead to perfection, but either
terrifies in its own work.

or inflates and makes hypocrites. But this is a new doctrine, which is
separate from all laws, even contrary to all laws.

**In the desert.**

Even those who teach are said to be in the wilderness. The gospel
writers use this saying from John and from the desert where John stayed
\[Matth. 3, 3. Marc. 1, 3. Luc. 3, 4. Joh. 1, 23\]. For that is where
this teaching ministry began. But he calls it a desert, contrary to the
law. For the doctrine of the law is a doctrine of the prison, which
imprisons us. It is a worldly (politica) teaching, which is not locked
up in the free desert, but in the narrow corner of the Jewish people.
But the Gospel, which began from John, is preached in the great and wide
wilderness. For it is the very freest doctrine that is preached
publicly, and is as common to all as the light of heaven.

**Prepare the way for the Lord.**

18\) \"Way\" means action, life and way of life. Because he now adds
\"to the Lord,\" the ancients who take this passage from good works,
from an honorable and seemingly holy life, are mistaken. For these are
the ways of men, which we also see in some pagans, such as Atticus,
Socrates, Xenophon and others. Therefore, the way of the Lord is the way
of life and the divine life, that he himself may live in us. This way is
prepared when we throw away presumption on our righteousness and works,
and recognize our sins. For although outward disgraces and vices, such
as adultery, fornication, theft, etc., are also obstacles in the way of
the Lord, which must be removed, these, namely, presumption and one\'s
own righteousness, are far greater and more serious, for they definitely
close off access to grace.

\(19\) Therefore, the way is prepared when we throw away these great
stones and immovable blocks (I mean presumption and reliance on works),
and cling only to the reception of the twofold, with a simple confession
of our guilt:

478 xxii, 414\^17. interpretations on the prophets. W, vi, 761-764. 479

\"If thou wilt, O LORD, impute sin, O LORD, who shall stand?\" \[Ps.
130, 3.\] Just as Paul says: \"I count all things as evil against the
abundant knowledge of Christ my Lord, for whose sake I have counted all
things as evil, and count them as filth, that I may win Christ.\" 2c.
\[This is finally \"the way of the Lord,\" namely the righteousness of
Christ, and not our own works. If this stands, then all that is
everywhere of monastic vows, of divine services, of works 2c. must
necessarily fall. For if Christ is righteousness, what are our works?
But the law and good works are to have another use; for the law is for
the discipline of the flesh and for civil life. For in the flesh the law
is to rule, but in the conscience and in the spirit liberty is to reign,
as I have already reminded above \[§ 11\].

V. 4: **All the valleys are to be raised.**

20 What follows are figurative speeches. The prophet thus intimates that
this voice foretells the abolition of the law, and accuses all alike of
sin, both those who have the righteousness of the law and others who are
without it. \"The mountains\" are the saints; \"the valleys\" the
sinners. To these equally the voice of grace is proclaimed;
consequently, apart from grace, they are in sins, as Peter says in Acts,
\"GOD makes no distinction between us and the Gentiles. \"Now I learn
with truth that GOD does not regard the person\" \[Acts 10:34\].
Therefore, here, at the preaching of the Gospel, there is neither
Gentile nor Jew, neither wise man nor Thor \[Gal. 3, 28.\], but they
have all sinned \[Rom. 3, 12.\]. Furthermore, the Jews are offended by
this preaching, who have borne the heat of the sun throughout the day,
as it is written in the Gospel \[Matth. 20, 12\].

**And what is unequal shall become even, and what is bumpy shall become
bad.**

21 What he said above \[v. 2\], \"the knighthood has an end,\" he now
says with other words and images. For those who want to attain
righteousness through the law are treading on an unequal and humpbacked
path.

The way on which they will never reach righteousness. We have
experienced this under the pope. No works, no services, no merits were
sufficient for the troubled consciences, they always trembled, they
always feared, they always found fault with their works.

\(22\) Thus the way of the law is not only crooked and unequal, leading
us farther and farther away from Christ through long detours, but it is
also rough and stony, so that the heart or the body can never be at
rest. This is the nature of all paths apart from grace. But the gospel
and the new sermon, which will follow the finished knighthood, yes, will
put an end to the knighthood, shows a smooth way, namely, to believe in
Christ without law; then, to serve one\'s neighbor. This way has nothing
rough because it makes the conscience calm; and it also has no bends
because the teaching is right and straight. Thus the prophet best
describes the ways of life that are apart from grace, and shows the
right way that alone leads to righteousness. This is the doctrine of
faith, which presents Christ.

V. 5: **The glory of the Lord shall be revealed.**

23\. the rough and crooked ways of our righteousness set up their
victory signs, make presumptuous people, blow up. But this teaching
reveals the glory of the Lord, makes us sinners, and praises the Lord as
a Savior and Redeemer.

**And all flesh with one another shall see that the mouth of the LORD
speaketh.**

\(24\) There is an emphasis in the word, \"of the Lord. As if to say,
\"Before this the mouth of Moses the servant spoke; but the gospel is to
be taught by the mouth of man, but this mouth is no longer the mouth of
man, but the mouth of the Lord Christ, who is God, and speaks in the
gospel.

**V. 6. 7. A voice speaks: Preach.**

25 The prophet goes on to exalt the ministry of the word: let it come to
pass that at the time when the righteousness of grace shall be preached,
the righteousness of grace shall be preached.

4802 . xm. 4i7\^is.\' Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 40, 6. 7. W.
vi, 764-767. 481

When the Lord\'s word shall be preached, this also shall be preached,
which follows: \"All flesh is hay\" 2c. But here someone might wonder
what the prophet wants with this talk. Certainly this, that he wanted to
show what a difficult ministry preaching is. For to preach the word of
God is nothing other than to incur the wrath of all hell and Satan, then
of all the saints in the world, and all the power of the world. But it
is the most dangerous state to expose oneself to so many teeth of Satan.
This is exactly what the prophet wanted to remind us of with this talk.

**All meat is hay.**

This text has been shamefully torn apart by Jerome and the Diatribe. But
the Holy Spirit does not speak so incomprehensibly as they think. He
speaks: \"All flesh\", consequently he excludes nothing. And adds: \"is
hay\". But this would still be acceptable, if he did not add that it is
hay, which is to wither and be cut down, as it is good for nothing.
Furthermore, flesh means the whole man, with reason and all natural
gifts. For thus the prophet declares himself, adding, \"The people is
the hay.\" For it would not be a people unless it had reason, religion,
and righteousness, both civil and ceremonial. Therefore, those who
invent a synecdoche here falsify the text. For he who says \"all\"
excludes nothing, he does not exclude the holy people of the Jews, not
the wisdom of the Greeks, not the civil order, but he badly makes an
opposition between spirit and flesh, and makes the conclusion:
everything that is not driven by the Holy Spirit, however good it may
seem to be, however just and holy it may be, that is flesh. But, as I
said, this preaching is dangerous. For who would dare to call all the
righteousnesses of the papacy, all the good works of Bernard, Augustine,
and other great men flesh and dry hay? And yet they are truly flesh and
hay, if it be held that righteousness is thereby merited.

**All his goodness is like a flower in the field.**

27 Instead of: Omnis gloria Hus it is better translated: Omnis gratia
ejus, that is, the best

Good deeds, the good deeds of mercy. For he does not say: Sins,
adultery, theft, etc., but the highest wisdom and the works of
righteousness, and the very best that flesh can do, are like a flower of
the field; they have only the mere appearance of holiness, in fact they
are destined to fire. If the world could persuade itself of this, who
would not throw away his cap and other foolish things, by which wretched
men think to earn righteousness in vain?

**For the Spirit of the Lord blows in three.**

Here Jerome takes the \"Spirit of the Lord\" for wrath in an
inconsistent way. For the prophet here opposes spirit and flesh, wind
and hay, and says: \"The Spirit of Christ, who teaches that our
righteousness is not in law or works but in grace, blows into the hay
through the ministry of the word. Just as he says in John \[Cap. 16:8\],
\"The Holy Spirit will punish the world for sin\"; by this preaching the
hay becomes dry and no longer grows green; that is, the righteousness
and wisdom of the flesh is rejected as useless, even as harmful, for the
attainment of righteousness and salvation.

\(29\) But this doctrine gives rise to great vexation. For men think: If
good works are of no use, let us follow our lusts and live without law.
Therefore we must be careful where we say that works are of no use. For
now we are dealing with justification and counseling the conscience.
Here no works, no righteousness, no worship are of any value, but our
eyes must be fixed solely on the merit and death of Christ, who suffered
for our sins. If we take hold of this Christ by faith, that he has done
enough for us, and by his death has overcome our sins and our death,
then we live in righteousness, not in our righteousness, but in
Christ\'s righteousness, which alone gives eternal life.

\(30\) Furthermore, in addition to this spiritual life, we are also
bound by the secular rule that we must also live outwardly honorably.
Here

482 L. XXII, 419-422. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 767-770.
483

Another righteousness must be drawn from this, not Christian
righteousness, but worldly righteousness, which is also necessary and
cannot be omitted without sin. But it contributes nothing more to
Christian righteousness than eating, drinking, sleeping 2c. Now if good
works are condemned, they are so condemned that they are useless for
Christian righteousness. For the victory over death and hell, the
forgiveness of sin, and righteousness are far too important things for
our good works to contribute anything to them. It is a grace, and that
is God\'s grace, which gives the great treasure in Christ alone by grace
and free of charge to the faithful.

Therefore, we praise the disciplinam of St. Bernard, Benedictus, and
others, who went before the lines, because the prophet also calls human
righteousness a flower, as a beautiful and apparent thing that captures
the eyes and reason. But it is the highest ungodliness to believe that
we obtain forgiveness of sins and righteousness by this chastening. Thus
reason concludes, and is taken in by the appearance of works; but the
Holy Spirit judges otherwise, that the final end of all the works of the
law is not eternal life, which we already have by faith, but that by
this obedience we may also testify to the faith before men, and kill the
flesh with our lusts, which are contrary to the Spirit.

**V. 8 The hay withers, the flower fades; but the word of our God
endures forever.**

\(32\) This is a good saying to write on every wall. The word of the
Lord alone shall remain; all that is above and apart from the word of
God shall perish like a flower of the field. Here, make a register of
all the works that are done in the papacy without the Word of God. The
monastic orders,^o^ ) the mass, the cap, the pardon, the pilgrimages,
the indulgences 2c. are not the word of God, therefore they will be

o\) In the 1532 edition instead of: \^the monastic orders\": The
Franciscan Order, along with other monastic orders.

pass away. But the word of God, and all who believe the word, will
remain forever. Furthermore, it is hard to believe that this weak voice,
this catching of breath, will remain and sustain us for eternity, since
so many and so much apparent works and righteousness wither away.

V. 9. **Zion, you preacher, get up on a high mountain.**

A preacher has a double duty, which is to teach and to exhort. Hitherto
he has taught, saying that all flesh is hay, and that only the word of
the Lord endures, which brings with it the end of knighthood and two
things, namely, righteousness instead of sin, and life instead of death.
Since this doctrine cannot be preserved without challenge, for Satan
seeks to suppress it and raises tyrants and heresies against it, the
prophet turns to the other part against the challenge and exhorts the
faithful to be strong in faith and not to let the doctrine of the gospel
be snatched from their hands by force or cunning, but to teach it
confidently and freely. He then acts against the heretics who dispute
this teaching. So the following part of this chapter consists of an
exhortation of his own and a refutation of the opponents.

34\. He calls Zion \[that is, the whole church of believers\] a preacher
(evangelizatricem). For all who are called to the gospel are
evangelists. And now certain families are not appointed to the teaching
office of the gospel, as under the law the administration of the
priestly office stood with the only tribe of Levi, but people of all
classes can be appointed to the teaching office of the gospel. However,
because everything in the church should be done properly, not all may
teach without distinction, but only those who are called to teach. Thus,
the difference between the clergy and the secular is only in the office,
but not in the law. Furthermore, by this name he distinguishes the
church from the first Jerusalem, which was a disciple of the law. The
new Jerusalem is to be a teacher of the gospel; she is to teach others,
not to learn the law.

484 xxii, 422-424. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 40, 9-11. W. vi,
770-772. 485

35 This is figuratively speaking, that he says, \"Climb up a high
mountain.\" As if to say, Stand forth, lift up thy head, exalt thyself
on high. For Satan and the world would oppress thee: but preach thou the
gospel continually 2c.

V. 10. **For behold, the Lord GOD is coming mightily.**

\(33\) This is a good comfort, with which he informs the humiliated
preachers of the word, who are the least, the most despised and the
weakest. Peter first had to deny Christ, and the other apostles had to
flee from Christ before they preached the gospel. Thus, Paul first
persecuted the Church of God.

God chose despised and weak people for this service of the word, so that
the divine power of the word would come to light, so that it could not
be suppressed even in the weakest persons. And if the gospel were
preached by the powerful of the world, people would be more taken in by
the appearance of the person than by the word itself. Therefore, the
word is rather praised by the very way from which, as the wise men of
the world think, it comes to be despised because of the weakness of its
ministers, because the power of it is most of all expressed by the fact
that, although it is taught by despicable persons, it nevertheless
cannot be suppressed, but the very word suppresses the hypocrisy and
idolatry which are taught and protected by the powerful.

Thus the word has remained these fifteen years^p^ , although Satan has
sought to suppress it through so many persecutions. For against the word
he has stirred up tyrants, princes, instigated the peasants\' revolt,
brought red spirits and endless heresies out of the way, and yet it
still stands unharmed. But the world does not see it, but the eyes of
the Spirit see it, that this power may be mighty in weakness, that it
may come to pass that he who is in us is greater than he who is in the
world \[1 John 4:4\].

p\) In the 1532 edition: these twelve years ago.

**Behold, his reward is with him, and his recompense 1) is before him.**

39 These are dark Hebrew expressions. For the \"reward\" signifies the
power of the word, and the \"recompense\" signifies the fruit of the
word, just as the Hebrews also call the wine itself and the fruit of the
vineyard opus vineae. But the opinion is this: \"Behold, the Lord is
coming mightily, and behold, his reward is with him,\" 2c., that is, he
will make his word not to be preached in vain, but he will be powerful
through the word, that wherever his word will be preached, his reward
and. his work will be great, that is, there he will sanctify and be
powerful. As if he wanted to say: Until now the Lord did not come
mightily, because he gave the weak law, by which the souls were only
frightened. But the gospel brings a certain fruit; it gives forgiveness
of sins, it gives peace to the heart 2c.

**V. 11. He will feed his flock like a shepherd.**

He will take the care of his flock over himself; he will not give the
sheep to the hirelings to feed. Furthermore, when he says that some
sheep he will feed, others he will care for and carry in his bosom,
others he will gather into his arms, he indicates in an exceedingly
lovely image that Christ has in his kingdom the word that ministers to
all persons, to the strong and to the weak, whose faith it nourishes
with its comforts and promises. This is a great consolation, that all
who in any way believe in the word, however weak they may be, are
admitted into the kingdom of Christ, and only the unbelievers are
excluded; the rest all Christ can and will carry. 2c.

This is the first part of the encouragement to the fainthearted against
the mighty. For he instructs and exhorts them not to fear, but to teach
the gospel continually. For Christ will help the afflicted by the power
of the word and will not leave them. Now he refutes the ungodly.

1\) Iruetus; in the Vulgate: Opus.

486 L. XXII, 424-427. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 772-776.
487

**V. 12-17: Who measures the waters with his fist?**

\(42\) Some take this passage to mean that God boasts of His power in
order to execute the weak, as John also says: \"He who is in us is
greater than he who is in the world\" \[1 John 4:4\]. But I consider it
a refutation of the heretics and saints of works who argue against the
righteousness of faith, and undertake to reconcile so great a power,
namely the divine majesty, with their self-chosen works, and prescribe
to God, as it were, what he should approve and disapprove, what he
should like and dislike. For if a monk thinks that he pleases God with
his rule and order, what is that but an obvious idolatry, according to
which he invents such a God who approves of these foolish and ungodly
works? Against this harmful presumption of our powers and works, he
describes the divine power with such sublime images, so that he may lead
us back to the word that puts an end to chivalry and gives us a double
reward for our sins; so that we may place a certain trust in the grace
of God alone, which has been offered and given to us in Christ.
Therefore, he refutes those who teach something other than grace and
faith.

43\. \"Who,\" he says, \"measures the waters with his fist?\" 2c. As if
he wanted to say: So great is the greatness of the divine power. What
can you miserable worms do to such greatness? And yet the Franciscans,
Augustinians, Carthusians 2c. with their rules dare to oppose this
greatness, which neither heaven nor earth can contain. And this they do
with such great boldness and presumption that they dare to have done or
to want to do something worthy of such greatness.

44 To all these questions that the prophet asks, \"Who measures the
waters with his fist? 2c., the saints of works and all who go along
trusting in the works answer: We can do it. And they are counselors,
yes, teachers of the Holy Spirit, and masters of works, who strive after
the Godhead and put themselves in God\'s place. For

If we deviate from the Word, the power of this inherent sin attaches to
us, that we strive for deity, as Adam did in Paradise, persuaded by
Satan, when he said: \"You will be like God\" \[Gen. 3:5J.

**V. 18. Who then do you want to imitate God?**

He continues in the rebuttal. Since I am such a God, and so great a God,
you cannot devise anything by which you can propitiate me or earn my
favor. For they invent another God, who believe that he can be
reconciled by works. The Carthusian monk invents a God who walks in a
cap and girds himself with a rope. For he believes that God is pleased
with such a life. Thus, those who make pilgrimages invent a wandering
God, because they believe that God delights in pilgrimages, otherwise
they would not make them. Thus, the entire papacy was nothing else, and
it is once again a potter who makes idols, who gives God as many forms
as the poets have attributed to their Proteus.

**V. 19, 20: The master knows how to make an image, and the goldsmith
gilds it and makes silver chains for it. Likewise, if a poor hewer is
able, he chooses a wood that does not rot and looks for a wise master to
make an image that will last.**

This is how this text is most easily translated. But the opinion is
this: The rich make images of gold, the poor of wood, and so they set up
a worship service. For this was the custom in those days. Our papists of
today do quite the same thing, if you look at the custom and the
attitude, although the object and the material with which they have to
do (materia circa quam) is something different. For they \[the Jews\]
thought that when they had erected an image, they had done a work
pleasing to God, as the Israelites say \[1 Kings 12:28\], \"These are
your gods who brought you out of Egypt.\" As if to say: This service is
pleasing to the true God who brought us out of Egypt. This is also what
the monks and the rest of the people are doing today.

**488** xxn, **427-430.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 40,
19-26. **W.** vi, **776-779. 489**

of the Pope, who ascribe this to the works they themselves have chosen,
that they please God and propitiate Him.

**V. 21. Do you not know?**

47\. To the refutation he adds a punishment: You have by nature some
knowledge of God, otherwise you would not honor God in idols. But you do
not follow this knowledge, otherwise you would not do what you do. For
from you God has no help, from you he is not reconciled, from you he is
not formed, he does not need your works; as Paul Apost. 17, 25: \"He
gives us\", he receives nothing from us; he helps us, from us he has no
help. Why then do you want to give him something? Why then do you
pretend that he delights in your services and works, that he is
reconciled by them? 2c. A Carthusian thinks: God is not gracious to me
for nothing, that is, He is not God; therefore I will make another God,
for whom I will make myself worthy by such a rule, by such clothing, by
such works 2c. In this infinite godlessness the whole papacy is drowned.

**Have you not understood it from the beginning of the earth?**

\(48\) This is how it must be read, that is, from the time the earth was
founded.

**V. 22. He sits above the circle of the earth.**

That is, in all the roundness that is above the earth. Now him whom
heaven and earth cannot contain, will you enclose in your images, in
your fasts, in your caps, in your masses? In the sight of God, all of
you, with all your righteousnesses, are like locusts scattered by the
wind.

**Who stretches the sky like a thin skin.**

50 This is a prophetic fullness with which he attacks carnal
righteousness. He stretches out the heavens himself, what is it that
thou strivest to make? 2c.

**V. 23-25. who brings the princes to nothing, and makes the judges of
the earth vain, as if their tribe had neither plants 2c.**

\(51\) He does not say this as if he condemns princes or judges. For the
offices

are good and appointed by God, but he condemns their actions and their
own righteousness, with which they perish as if they had never been. So
today there are no more Pharisees, no more Sadducees, no more Arians,
but they have all perished as if they had never been. Thus all human
righteousness, all human inventions perish, even if they come from such
great people. Thus all the kingdoms of the world, having begun to oppose
the kingdom of Christ, have perished. \"But the word of the Lord endures
forever\" \[v. 8\], and \"the righteous shall flourish like a palm
tree\" planted by the waters 2c. \[Ps. 92, 13/

**V. 26. Lift up your eyes on high.**

\(52\) Here the prophet turns to the weak to raise them up, and commands
them to lift up their eyes on high, and to look at the stars as they
stand in their order. As if he wanted to say: Your righteousness is a
completely different righteousness, as if it should be a worldly
righteousness, which is like a drop in a bucket, 1) and like a small
stick. But as the stars are innumerable, and have lasted from the
beginning of the world until now, so your righteousness is far greater
than that of those people; it cannot be enclosed within any limits, and
will last forever, for it does not come from you, but he who created
this permanent building of heaven has shared it with you and given it to
you out of grace and free of charge. Thus the prophets present to us the
one righteousness of Christ, on which we can safely rely; on our
righteousness we cannot trust.

**That there can be no lack of one.**

\(53\) Thus he shows the infinite number and power, that in so many
centuries not a single star has become dull or corrupted. The
righteousness of the faithful is also of this nature; it is of infinite
greatness and power, because it is not ours, but God\'s. For Christ is
our righteousness, as Paul says \[1 Cor. 1:30\].

1\) Erlanger: stillas, situlas.

490 L. xxn, 430-432. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 77S-783.
491

V. 27. **Why then do you speak, Jacob?**

\(54\) Here he applies the similitude with which he praised to us the
abundant righteousness that believers have. But he reproves our
unbelief, because we are so slow to believe and so fainthearted.

**My way is hidden from the Lord.**

This passage can be taken in two ways. First, from the \"way\" that we
prepare for ourselves by our strength, as if the frightened and fearful
souls wanted to say: God does not accept works for righteousness;
therefore only this is left, that I despair, because I cannot advise
myself nor help myself. The other opinion is more suitable, that it
should be understood that the prophet speaks of the way that he has
commanded to be prepared above. It is as if the weak souls wanted to
say: The word promises righteousness, but the conscience says something
completely different, in which I feel the sin and death that frighten
me. Thus \"my way is hidden,\" that is, I do not feel the righteousness
that the Word promises, but rather I feel the opposite. Against this
tendency to despair, the prophet comforts us and refers us to the Word.

V. 28. Do **you not know? Have you not heard?**

\(56\) Have you not heard? he says, as if to say, \"You must not judge
your righteousness by the outward appearance of your feelings, for this
judgment will deceive you, but rely on the word alone, that you may
accomplish by word what you cannot accomplish by deed. Set this word
against death, sin, hell and all fogs, and you will surely be saved. It
is easy to believe a word, but to believe that it is the word of God the
Savior is extremely difficult for the flesh, even impossible. But if the
hearts are convinced that it is God\'s word that promises salvation from
sin and danger, then they are ready to endure death and all evil,
because they conclude so afterwards: God has said it, he will not
deceive you; he is almighty, therefore he can give you eternal life for
this bodily life, and he will also give it, because he has promised it.

[But one must remember this with diligence.]{.underline}

That he saith, \"Hast thou not heard?\" For he refers to the outward
word, saying, \"I am weak for a time. But for this cause I give thee the
word in thy mouth, and in thine heart, that thou mayest live in the
word, without anything before thee, and without feeling it. Therefore,
if we do not take hold of the word in temptation, we will be overcome by
the sensation of the present adversity and will succumb.

**The Lord, the eternal God.**

\(58\) This is a great comfort. As if he wanted to say: Look at me, who
am eternal, not at your weakness. If you feel that you are weary, I will
strengthen you. If thou feelest thine enemies, thine iniquity, thine
exceeding meekness, I will stand by thee, and bring thine enemies to
heel, but thou shalt stand still. But all this is spoken in such a way
that in fact and in experience the contradiction is before our eyes.
Therefore he recalls, \"Hast thou not heard?\" As if he wanted to say:
The word promises you this, and I want you to believe the same; with the
feeling you will not understand it, after the feeling the contradiction
will happen to you. Therefore faith is a great thing, since it grasps
invisible things, and hangs on such things that are nowhere, or are
felt.

V. 29-31. **He gives strength to the weary.**

\(59\) As we recalled in the beginning of the chapter, we also see here
who and what God\'s people are. Boys and young men of the world are not
God\'s people, for they are presumptuous of their power, righteousness
and wisdom. Therefore, they do not need divine power and help. But
God\'s people are those whom He calls \"weary\" and \"who have no
strength,\" who are burdened with sins and other troubles; with these
the divine power finds a place. Those who feel their sins should not
flee from the presence of God, as reason and our nature are wont to do,
but rather they should take refuge in God, who cannot be God to us, that
is, a justifier and a beatifier, if we do not have sin and death.
Furthermore, he compares the majesty of the world and the power of the
world with the blooming age of young men.

**492** 6. XXII, E-E. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 41, 1. 2. 4.
W. VI, 783-786. **493**

**The Forty-First Chapter.**

He continues to comfort his own and to refute the adversaries. But he
makes what he said before credible by citing an exceedingly great
example. He contrasts this with the stories of all pagans, and proves
his statement with Abraham, in whom he praises two things. One is that
he protected him, and that he came through so many hostile nations
unharmed into the land of Canaan. The other is that he has defeated the
great kings with a small crew. This, he says, I foolish and weak God did
through weak Abraham. You who despise me, do also something of the kind,
if you can! Furthermore, he calls \"the isles\" all the pagans who
worship idols, who consider God to be a foolish and weak God, and who
despise Him. By the idolaters, however, are primarily understood the
work-saints Jews.

**V. 1. Let the nations strengthen themselves (mutent fortitudinem).**

2\. \"Let them change \[their strength\],\" he says, \"just as one
changes clothes, that is, let them get ready and get ready.

**V. 2. Who raised the righteous man from the exit?**

3\. How? Is this such a great miracle? Consider all the circumstances
with diligence, and it will become clear the greatness of the divine
power that was able to preserve this Abraham unharmed. For, what do you
think? He dwelt in a hostile land; he passed through the land of
enemies. He went out from the land of enemies, and had nowhere a
shelter, nowhere a welcome. But this is a thing full of trouble and
danger, to confess one\'s faith, to say in the midst of Babylon that
their God is not God, that he alone has the true worship, that all other
peoples\' religions are godless and vain. If one confesses this, one
exposes oneself daily to certain death. But that Abraham did this, the
scripture does not say obviously, but that he was a god.

dern hints at it darkly, as it says that he was a godly man who believed
God \[Gen. 15:6\]. But to us, who read the holy Scriptures, it is
necessary to conclude the preceding and the following from it: If he
believed, he confessed the faith; if he confessed, he felt the cross and
all the persecutions of Satan, with which he contested both his life and
his faith. Rightly, therefore, this story is held in such high esteem,
and it is not in vain that Moses, Gen. 12, describes his journey in so
many words.

**Who gave the nations and kings before him to be mighty over them?**

Here he speaks of the other miracle, which we should be all the more
commanded to see what a mighty thing the sword is when it is drawn and
struck according to the word of God; and again, how blunt the sword is
when it is drawn without God\'s command. There are several examples of
this in the books of Kings. It must also be noted here that the sword
and the magisterial office are hereby affirmed, and that also Christians
(in contrast to the error of the Anabaptists) are allowed to administer
magisterial offices and to wage war.

**And gave them to his sword, like dust.**

5 Note this imagery, that the violence of the wicked against the godly
is as it were \"dust\" and \"stubble. But these are words of faith,
since in appearance the opposite is expressed. Faith alone judges and
believes that the Turk is stubble and dust scattered by the wind against
the godly. But the flesh thinks and judges quite differently.

**V. 4. Who does it, and makes it, and calls all men one after another
from the beginning?**

From the particular he passes to the general. He says that this is the
very way,

494 **k. XXII, 435-437. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
786-78.\"** 495

I call these and those people, as Paul says, Apost. 17, 26, that God has
set a goal for all the generations of men who dwell on the face of the
whole earth, and has provided beforehand how long and far they shall
dwell.

**It is I, the Lord, both the first and the last.**

\(7\) All generations of the earth pass away, but I alone abide forever.
So all idolatries, all heresies pass away; the word of the Lord abides
forever.

**V. 5. 6. When the islands saw this, they were afraid.**

The prophet continues to comfort the godly and to frighten the
adversaries, as he began in the previous chapter. Therefore, he has
praised the power of God, whom the whole world considers weak. Now he
also introduces the adversaries and ridicules their pretensions and
plots with which they try to defend their idolatry and worship against
the word of God. For although they see that their final downfall is
imminent, and are therefore afraid, they continue in their stubbornness
and obduracy, just as our adversaries are doing today. They see that God
Himself has made this change in religion. They see that their worship
services are ungodly and our teaching is godly and taken from the Holy
Scriptures, just as some of them have publicly confessed that we teach
all articles of faith purely and according to the truth. And yet their
hearts are so blinded that they persist in condemning, persecuting, and
wanting the truth they have recognized to be destroyed.

9 We see this also in this prophetic living representation (mimesi). He
says: \"They see it and are afraid; nevertheless, they draw near and
approach; they gather their forces and consult with each other how they
will defend idolatry; and even though the matter is desperate, they
comfort each other. 2c. This is entirely consistent with our papists
today. Just as the sculptor spares no effort when he makes a picture, so
also those do everything for the

Defending superstition against God and religion.

10\) \"Goldsmiths\" are those who defend the pabstry today. \"Gold\" is
the holy scripture, and they force it with hammers and bend it to make
their idols. But their righteousness and that idol does not want to
stand, but it wants to fall down. Therefore the carpenters and
goldsmiths run together and fasten the idol with nails, that is, with
the decrees of the popes, and with the name of the church, then also
with the prestige of the authorities. But they accomplish all this with
great difficulty. This is what the hammers and anvils mean. We, on the
other hand, teach the holy scriptures plainly and want them to be the
only ones valid, rejecting all human dreams and idols. Our thoughts and
aspirations are directed to this holy scripture alone; we leave the
happy progress to God, who is powerful in his church through the word.

The text is poorly translated here \[in the Vulgate\]. But the sense may
be rendered approximately thus: The carpenter takes the goldsmith to
him, and they beat with the hammer the sheet metal on the anvil, saying:
This is good to be joined together, and they tacked it with nails, lest
it should wobble 2c.

V. 8. **But you, Israel, my servant.**

\(11\) Hitherto he has treated the idolaters in a personal poem, and
taught how zealously they resist the doctrine of true godliness. Now he
adds very abundant consolations for the godly, exhorting them to endure
and patiently endure misfortune, for he would stand by them in all
misfortune.

12 Although this actually refers to the proclamation of the gospel,
which both the Jews and the Gentiles, when it first began to be taught,
tried to suppress with united forces, it can nevertheless be interpreted
quite generally to all who are in the same persecution as we are today,
and all those who want to live godly. For a Christian arouses Satan and
the whole world against him. But just as

496 L. xxii, 437-43S. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 41, 8-10. w.
vi, 789-792. 497

the apostles comforted themselves with such passages from the prophets,
so we also, who have the same Christ and the same Word, even the same
enemies, should support ourselves with such testimonies.

**My servant Jacob.**

Here he shows the reason why the world rages against the godly. I am
God, he says, who am considered weak by the wise men of the world, and
yet I suppress the wisdom and power of the world and destroy them.
Because they are angry at this, and cannot rage against me, they rage
against you, my servants. My name, which is preached among them, they
crucify. Because you, my servants, confess and bear this name, they rage
against you.

14 Furthermore, the name \"servant\" reminds us that we should be
certain of our profession. For the conscience must be made so certain
that one can say, \"No matter how much of a sinner I may be, this
doctrine and wisdom that I confess is true, and not mine, but God\'s,
and drawn and taken from God\'s words. Those who do not have this
certainty cannot stand in the cross. But then we feel how weak this joy
of faith and certainty is, when we are frightened with the horror of
divine wrath and sin. Therefore, we must accustom our hearts to it, and
ask God to help us in our temptation. Moreover, the name \"my servant\"
contains the highest consolation, both when one looks at the one who is
speaking, namely, the one who created everything, and when one considers
to whom he is speaking, namely, to the distressed and abandoned human
being.

**The one I mentioned.**

\(15\) It follows that whatever he does is pleasing to God; therefore,
no sins prevent this election.

**You seed of Abraham, my beloved.**

16 This actually goes to the apostles, who were of the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh. Furthermore, to whom this word comes, it also
makes them children.

God, and to the seed of Abraham. With these the Holy Spirit speaks so
sweetly, with whom he speaks so tyrannically in the temptation.

**V. 9. I do not reject you.**

17 Although it sometimes seems that way when we are challenged.

**V. 10. By the right hand of my righteousness.**

18 Dextera justi mei, that is, by the right hand of my justice. This is
an excellent passage. For since the godly are so in the world that the
heathen rage, and the kings rage against Christ, \[it happens\] 2) that
we are opposed with violence and cunning. For life must be exposed to
all dangers, and our conscience grieves and worries us not only because
of our sins, but also because of the sins of others. What is to be done
in the face of such adversity? God answers here and says, \"Do not be
afraid.\" With this he indicates that believers are indeed in a
desperate situation and despised, as Paul says: \"Inward fear, outward
strife\" \[2 Cor. 7:5\]. And yet he reminds us not to fear. Why is that?
Because we are not alone. Because though we are weak, yes, nothing at
all, yet GOD is everything. Though we are sinners, yet He is righteous,
saying, \"Who can accuse me of sin?\" \[John 8:46\] And verily, if we do
not lift ourselves up with such comforts, that we are not alone, we
shall be defeated in temptation.

\(19\) But all this becomes all the more lovely when all the
circumstances are considered. For who are those to whom he says not to
fear? They are certainly wretched, twisted people, for whom all help and
hope is gone. For we feel that we have both spent our lives badly and
administered our ministry negligently. Moreover, the fear of death, sin
and Satan lie upon us and press upon us. Now if the person who is
speaking here is held against these and commands us not to be afraid,
then

1\) In the 1532 edition, sutan is added.

2\) Added by us. It seems to us that M is missing.

498 k. XXII, 439-442. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 792-798.
499

we will see how glorious this consolation is, which brings about victory
against the princes of hell and against the mighty ones who rule in the
air. 1) \[Eph. 6, 12J

20 But here he uses a new word, saying, \"By the right hand of my
righteousness.\" For he alludes to the struggle of faith. For seeing in
ourselves no righteousness, no merits, and feeling our sins and
trespasses, we tremble, and are controverted with despair. Therefore he
says: You shall not be secure because of any righteousness you have, but
\"the right hand of my righteousness\" will strengthen, protect and
sustain you. This alone can sustain thee. Therefore, your sins shall not
make you fainthearted; rather, my righteousness shall establish you 2c.
Thus faith is based on an alien righteousness that it neither feels nor
sees.

**V. 11. Behold, they shall become a mockery and a reproach, all of
them.**

\(21\) Not only shall your faith and conscience be established, but you
shall also overcome your enemies. And not only this, but you will also
bring them under the yoke and convert them. Furthermore, our adversaries
are not only the tyrants, but also our flesh, our conscience, the world
and Satan. Against all these he promises victory.

**V. 12: Let the people who fight against you come to an end.**

\(22\) Here you see among whom and under what kind of people the church
lives, that it is oppressed by those who fight against it and quarrel
with it. Therefore these consolations must be accepted in faith; for in
fact we shall experience the opposite. For he promises us his right
hand, with which he will strengthen us; but we feel that his hand is
heavy upon us because of sin \[Ps. 32:4\], which threatens us with death
and holds out condemnation. So faith goes to things that are not seen
\[Heb.

1\) Dgl. Walch, St. Louis Edition, vol. IX, 840, ?59s.

11, 1.\], yes, which also seem to be the contradiction. All these
promises also stood over Johann Hus; and yet he was burned at the Concil
at Costnitz. This is how the contradiction happened at that time. But we
now see that the promises were true. For the papacy has become a mockery
and a disgrace, and those have perished who contradicted the word with
it; Johann Hus, however, is praised as a martyr of God, and lives with
Christ.

**V. 13. who strengthens your right hand.**

The hand is called the ministry of teaching and preaching. I am at your
word, that it may bear fruit among the pious, and be defended against
tyrants and heretics. This \"strengthening of our hand\" our adversaries
do not see; therefore they run against the one who will oppress them.

**V. 14. So do not be afraid, little worm Jacob.**

The holy church will not only overcome her adversaries, but will also
rule over them and trample them under her feet. All this is done through
the preaching of the gospel, which preaches the righteousness of Christ
and condemns our righteousness. Examples of this are found in the Acts
of the Apostles, in the sermons of the apostles, where we can see how
the apostles condemn works righteousness and crush the Jews.

25 He calls them \"a little worm\". For what are the few fishermen, the
few apostles against the religion of the Jews and against the power of
the Romans? And yet both the Jews and the Romans were destroyed by these
little worms through the preaching of the gospel.

**V. 15. Behold, I have made you a sharp new threshing carriage.**

26 This simile speaks of a different way of threshing than we have.
First you apostles, then all others who teach the gospel, will be as it
were a threshing cart with which the crops are threshed. You will crush
the righteousness and wisdom of the world, not with the sword and with
force, but by the word alone.

**500** XXII, 442-444. short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 41, 15-20.
W. VI, 7SS-798. **501**

Thus we have threshed in our time, that the monasteries, the masses, the
monks, the celibate state, and other mountains, on which the kingdom of
the pope was built, have fallen over the heap. But we have done this
only by threshing; we have brought forward the righteousness of Christ,
which is of thy faith. Weser threshing carriage has crushed the kingdom
of Antichrist. Coiners and others who wanted to destroy the papacy by
sword and rebellion have undertaken this threshing in an unfortunate
way. Anch those undertake this threshing in an unfortunate way who think
that the pabstacy can be destroyed by despising the sacraments, because
this only strengthens and hardens it.

**V. 16 But you will rejoice in the Lord.**

27 He clearly indicates the contrast. \"You will rejoice in the Lord\";
not by works, or by your righteousness.

**V. 17. The wretched and the poor seek water.**

\(28\) I think the prophet has described three kinds of temptations
here. The first is of the flesh, in which we are made fainthearted by
the knowledge of sin and our weakness. Therefore, God promises to uphold
us through His righteousness. The other is a challenge of the world,
since we are challenged with violence and cunning, because of the word
and our faith. But he has promised that we will overcome and scatter the
enemy, as dust 2c. Satan is not yet satisfied with this; he also adds
the third temptation, and tries everyone in particular, through
distrust, despair, hatred of God and blasphemies, as Job and Jeremiah
testify. This temptation also touches Christ in the Gospel Matth. 26,
24, where he says that it would be better that such a person had never
been born. In this challenge, the tongue begins to dry up with thirst.
For there Satan himself contends directly, not through his instruments,
against a weak and poor lamb. Therefore, he promises that he will help
in these grave temptations, and although there is no hope of the

water and comfort, may He shower us with joy and gladness of spirit.

**And is nothing there.**

This is the despair with which the mind is overwhelmed in such a
challenge. For no end or measure is seen, but it seems as if the
affliction would be eternal. This is why he concludes that no one sees
this affliction except the One of whom Paul says in his letter to the
Romans, Cap. 8, 26, that he also understands the groaning of the
afflicted.

**But I, the LORD, will hear them 2c.**

Thirty is a consolation. The greater the lack has been, the greater will
be the abundance. Even in despair you will feel the instantaneous help.
Furthermore, we must learn from such passages that we should persevere
in the midst of temptation, and hope all the more firmly, the more
everything seems to be lost.

**V. 18. I will make the desert lakes of water.**

\(31\) These are images by which he indicates that he wants to help the
desolate who are afflicted with the terrors of conscience to overcome
Satan, conscience, and the world, so that the glory of the word and of
faith may come to light, that they are mightier than Satan with his own,
and that Christ our King may overcome and triumph over all things in us.

**V. 19. I will give cedars in the desert.**

\(32\) He lists trees that are generally unfruitful, yet shady, to
indicate the peace and comfort that follows the challenge.

**V. 20: That they may see and know.**

\(33\) Here he adds the reason why God afflicts His own with so many
evils, with an evil conscience over sin, with the sensation of death,
with despair, with the power of the world, with the deceit of Satan, and
innumerable other evils, namely, that they may see that the hand of the
Lord has done these things, that is, that they may have confidence in
the Lord.

502 L- XXII, 444\^446. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 798-801.
503

They despair of their wisdom, justice, and power, and expect and ask for
help from God. This corruption is so deeply rooted in our souls that it
can hardly be eradicated and taken away by these innumerable evils with
which the godly are chastised. That is why our hearts often fall into
despair, our plots are not successful, the heretics, the tyrants and
Satan with his angels are stirred up.

**V. 21. So let your cause come to pass.**

\(34\) When the prophet, full of the Spirit, wants to exhort people to
trust in Christ, who is considered by the world to be a foolish and weak
God, he is proud because of the certainty of faith and says that he
alone is the true and powerful God. This he proved above \[Cap. 40, 12.
ff.\] with the creation and his works. But now he proves it by the power
and certainty of the word. For just as above \[Cap. 40, 18. ff.\] he
mocked the saints of works and other adversaries, and challenged their
gods to do the same thing that the true God has done, so now he
challenges them to say the same thing \[what the true God says\]. As if
to say: You can neither do nor speak what our God speaks and does, but
all your deeds and speeches are nothing, and lies.

35 But here the objection is made that many oracle sayings have been
true among the pagans. I answer: Because Satan is very knowledgeable
about nature and has become very learned through long experience, he can
sometimes predict the effects when he sees how the natural causes of
them are arranged. But still he predicts them ambiguously. The oracle of
Pyrrhus is known: Ajo te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse, 1) likewise that
of Crösus, that he would destroy a great empire if he fought against
Cyrus. These and other oracle sayings are truly diabolical, that he
would lead the people into deceit, and at

1\) I say that you, descendant of Ajax, can defeat the Romans; or: I say
that you Aeacids can defeat the Romans.

He can make them think as if he were God, if the outcome corresponds to
the words. But moreover, because he knows the thoughts and plans of the
great princes in general, he can easily predict wars or peace. But he
also predicts this in a vague and ambiguous way. But when he predicts
special things, he always indicates them only in the most obscure way,
so that they can be understood by no one until they have really
happened. Thus, in Lichtenberger 2) there are many things which no one
could understand before they happened. In contrast, what God speaks is
clear and true, not an ambiguous speech, but it certainly happens as it
is predicted. Thus he predicted that his kingdom would remain, and so it
remains, even though Satan, the world and the gates of hell are against
it.

**V. 22. Weissaget something before (priora, quae fuerunt, nunciate).**

This passage is obscure because of the Hebrew way of speaking. In the
prophecy the word always precedes and the fulfillment follows. So he
calls now priora the prophecy, which precedes. But the opinion is this:
Well, you despisers of our God, make an attempt with your spirit, lay
out some prophecy for us. Not only can you not predict something certain
yourselves, but you cannot even understand what has been predicted
before it happens.

37 Furthermore, it must be noted here that there is a double nature of
the prophecies. For some prophecies are general. As when I see a
villain, I can predict that if he does not change his life, he will
perish miserably. Some prophecies are special, or which concern only
some, as: Cyrus will bring back the captive people. Such special
prophecies are a special gift and happen through a new light of the
spirit. These are what the prophet is talking about in this passage. The
general prophecies, however, are all

2\) Compare Luther\'s \"Preface to Johann Lichtenberger\'s Weissagung,\"
Anno 1527. Walch, old edition, Vol. XIV, 231.

**504 L- 446-448.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 41, 22-25. **W.
VI, 801-803. 505**

Christians are known, because they are based on the first commandment:
\"I am the Lord your God, who visit the sins of the fathers to the third
and fourth generation, and show mercy to those who love me to the
thousandth generation\" \[Ex. 20:6\]. Here we see that all the faithful
will be saved, and the wicked will perish. But in what way, by what
people, and at what time the godly shall be saved, or the ungodly
destroyed, that belongs to the special prophecies. Therefore, all
Christians are prophets in general, because they can draw a certain
conclusion from the first commandment that the adversaries will perish.
On the other hand, the godless despisers of religion and the saints of
works, of whom the prophet is speaking here, lack both general and
special prophecy.

V. 23. **Tell us what will come after this.**

38 This is another kind of prophecy. For above \[v. 21. 22.\] he asks
them to explain those prophecies which were already present. But here he
reminds them that they themselves are to proclaim something new
beforehand out of their own spirit. For these are two different things,
to explain dark prophecies and to prophesy something new.

**Defiance, do good or harm.**

\(39\) He does not speak of a moral action, but of the action of the
works saints, by which they seek to establish their righteousness and to
destroy our doctrine. You, he says, can do neither; you can neither do
good to yours, nor harm to my Christians. He admits that the adversaries
can do it, but he denies them success.

\(40\) Here the flesh objects, \"Yes, they are bringing their cause very
high. Did not the Jews crucify Christ? did they not kill the apostles?
2c. That is certainly to do harm to others and to strengthen his cause.
Therefore it must be known that these are words of faith, which are not
to be regarded according to outward appearance. For with this very
thing, by which the adversaries

If they harm the godly, they promote the godly, and even the suppression
of the truth strikes out to honor. Therefore, the adversaries\'
undertakings are in vain. The Jews have crucified Christ, but has the
gospel been suppressed because of that? Rather, the gospel still
remains, and they have completely perished with all their worship.

41 And truly, this example should strengthen our hearts when we see that
the godly are strangled by the adversaries, the servants of the Word are
driven out, the Word itself and religion are condemned by the powerful
in the world through atrocious edicts.

**This is how we want to talk about it.**

With this he goes through them in a concealed way. As if he wanted to
say: You do not have to sing the song of triumph before the victory;
first let your strength be seen, and afterwards, when you have received
the victory, triumph.

**V. 24. Your actions are also made of nothing.**

The \"doing\" means the benefit and end they seek through their works.
Accordingly, the opinion is: You will not accomplish anything.

**And voting for you is an abomination.**

\(44\) He is an abomination who approves or follows you and yours. For
this is what the word \"choose\" means. But the prophet also wanted to
indicate that the works and the religion of the works saints have a
great appearance, that the whole world chooses them, approves of them,
follows them. For there is nothing more powerful in the world than
superstition. It is king and emperor over all that is high in the world,
but it is an abomination before God.

**V. 25. But I raise one from the midnight.**

45 Now he sets his example. You,\" he says, \"can neither help yours nor
harm mine; but if I say something, it will certainly happen. For I take
this saying in general, as if to say, All whom I only ever call, either
to destroy, or to save, from whatever quarter it may come.

50H **L. xxir, 44s?.** Interpretations about the prophets. **W. vi,
8os-8v8.** 507

They will certainly come and preach my name, that is, they will do my
will and carry out what I have commanded.

46\. \"From midnight\" and \"from the going out of the sun,\" I
understand distributive, that is, from whatever region I will, whether
from here or from there; from morning the Chaldeans, that they may save,
from midnight the Assyrians, that they may destroy 2c. You idols cannot
do this. Others understand this passage of Christ, that he will call
some from midnight, some from morning. The opinion is good, but I follow
the general one, of all who are called, either to destroy, or to save.
But it is included in this general opinion also Christ.

**He will preach my name to them.**

47\. \"He will preach,\" that is, he will do my will and command.

**And will go over the mighty.**

48 \[Vulgate: Adducet magistratus, that means He will go over the mighty
ones. Thus he calls the Pharisees and high priests, the noblest in
religion. The same happens to our papists today; they will also be
trampled underfoot, not by weapons, but by the word of God.

**V. 26. Who can proclaim anything from the beginning?**

That is a repetition. Since you cannot bring any proofs of the Godhead,
to whom is this honor due? Certainly to me, who can prove by deed what I
demand from you. You can do nothing.

**But there is no one to hear a word from you.**

\(50\) Nothing can be heard from you, because you do not speak anything
that serves the true religion. Otherwise, you talk too much and too
much.

**V. 27. I am the first to say to Zion.**

51 \[Instead of: Primus ad Sion dicet\] translate: \"I am the first who
says to Zion, Behold, there it is; and I give preachers to Jerusalem.\"
\"Behold,\" saith he, \"there it is,\" which I have promised, it shall
surely come to pass. I give my people my word and ministers of the word;
therefore I am the true God; but your religion and righteousness are
nothing.

**V. 28. 29. But there I look, but there is no one.**

52\. he ridicules the adversaries. He says, \"They cannot counsel in
doubtful matters, they cannot comfort the afflicted. 2c. Thus, apart
from the word, there is neither counsel nor comfort, but everything is
shaky and uncertain, on which the conscience cannot safely rely. So
emphatically does the prophet warn and fortify us through this passage
against false religion and teaching.

**The Forty-Second Chapter.**

So far, we have heard a wide-ranging treatise on the righteousness of
faith. Although this righteousness is weak in this flesh, he has opposed
it to all the splendor of idols and human righteousness, because the
works of God are constant and enduring, and the words of God are certain
and come to pass. But the choicest of the pagans, idols and saints of
works, he says, is an abomination. Now he comes back to Christ. As if he
wanted to

I will show you where you can most abundantly find that which I have now
praised: It is Christ. Now he presents him as the teacher, master and
governor, whom we should hear and to whom we should adhere. We should be
quite sure about his word and work.

**V. 1. Behold, this is my servant.**

2 This is to be diligently noted that he says \"a servant,\" as Paul
also does Cor.

508 D- m\". s-6- Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 42, 1-3. w. vi.
8v8-8ii. 509

2, 2.\]: \"I know nothing but Christ\" (not the Lord, but) \"the
crucified.\" For this is how we are to receive him, as the servant who
offers us the divine word, who takes our sins upon himself, who endures
for us the punishment which we ourselves deserved. But the form of the
servant is despised, therefore the Jews did not receive him, And Christ
himself warns us by saying: \"Blessed are they who do not take offense
at me\" \[Matth. 11, 6.\].

But at the same time, through this name, all services, all deeds and
works are annulled and rejected, because this Christ alone is God\'s
servant. Therefore, the servile service of the monks and the entire
papacy is ungodly, since they boast, without trusting in this servant,
that they serve God with their way of life, clothing, fasting, shouting
and other foolish works.

**I receive it.**

4\. I support him, I rest in him, as Paul says that the whole Godhead is
in Christ bodily \[Col. 2, 9.\]. Therefore all should hear this servant
of God and believe him. This servant alone, who has such powerful
testimonies, can make us certain of the Father\'s gracious and good
will. If we believe him, we will also be made servants and chosen before
God, although in this flesh there are remnants of sin and the highest
weakness.

**He will bring justice among the Gentiles.**

5\. he will be another person than Moses, who was hidden in the corner
of the Jewish land. For he shall spread the law, that is, the word of
the gospel, among the Gentiles, who wander in error, and are involved in
divers sects and idolatries. But Moses\' word was unfruitful, and he
himself had a heavy tongue. But this \[my servant\'s\] tongue is full of
grace \[John 1:14\], therefore the word also shall be strong. He calls
it \"a right,\" because the gospel badly condemns all righteousness, and
praises and offers Christ\'s righteousness alone. But because this is by
the word alone, therefore the teaching is vexatious, and this kingdom is
despised.

**V. 2. He will not cry out nor shout.**

6 \[Instead of: Non clamabit, neque accipiet personam; nec audietur vox
ejus foris in the Vulgate\] translate, \"He will not shout nor call, and
his voice will not be heard in the streets,\" that is, Christ will
teach, but without shouting; he will not be a stormy, but a gentle and
sweet preacher. And his voice will not be heard, that is, the voice of
anger and unrest, but he will make the voice of grace heard, as he now
adds:

**V. 3. He will not break the crushed reed.**

7 Here he describes Christ with the most beautiful images, that he is a
physician for troubled consciences, who does not throw away the crushed
reed, that is, the wounded conscience, the fainthearted, those who are
frightened at the sight of their sins, the weak in life and faith, does
not suppress them, does not condemn them, but waits for them, heals
them, and lovingly embraces them.

\(8\) There are many examples of this throughout the Scriptures, but the
most numerous and the most beautiful are in the history of the Gospels.
See Peter, who denied Christ three times. See the rest of the apostles
who shamefully forsook Christ. Christ does not severely rebuke them, he
does not persecute and condemn them, but he attracts them to him in the
friendliest way, removes their terror, and even calls them brothers. See
the woman caught in adultery, Joh. 8, 3. ff. See the poor sinner \[Luc.
7, 37. ff.\]. Look at the thief on the cross \[Luc. 23, 42. 43.\], and
you will see how he does not break the crushed reed, but straightens and
strengthens it. The saints of works do not do this; rather, the more
diligent they are in their superstition, the more sharply they demand it
of others, and take no account of weakness or conscience.

**He will not extinguish the smoldering wick.**

\(9\) Methinks these two pieces can be easily distinguished from each
other, if the former is referred to conscience, and the latter to the
latter.

510 L. xxm, 6-s. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 8ii-8i4. 511

The latter is due to the weakness of the walk, as when some are angry,
hasty, careless, suspicious 2c., but especially to those who have been
called passionate (passionatos). These, he says, Christ will not take
away. Thus we see in the Gospel this lightness in Christ, that he bears
his disciples, who at times did inconsistent things, in the kindest way.
Paul also commands: \"Bear one another\'s burdens\" \[Gal. 6:2\].

\(10\) So when you see an angry, suspicious, careless brother, think
like this: This brother\'s burden must I bear; him shall I not reject,
so long as he confesses Christ. The way of life of the brethren should
indeed be sincere and lovely, like the light; but at times they are
provoked by Satan, at times by the flesh, to sadness, to anger, to
sullenness; there they must be borne, there the wickedness must not be
extinguished, but entertained 2c. The superstitious and the saints of
works do the opposite, who are so sullen and judge others so severely
that they would like to extinguish the smoldering wick altogether, as
much as there is in them. A Christian, however, should be a physician in
his conscience, but a palpable animal (asinus) in his outward way of
life, which carries the burdens of the brethren.

If a small mistake is made by us somewhere, our adversaries immediately
exclaim: Is this the evangelical life? Is this Christian morality? These
are foolish men, and do not know the Scriptures; they do not see that
this is the law of Christians, that they should bear the weak brethren.
But why would this commandment be necessary if all were perfectly holy?
So in the holy church there must be weak ones and those whose doings
offend us, just as in the human body there are not only legs, but also
weak and soft flesh. Therefore, the kingdom of Christ consists of people
who carry and who are carried. And our life is something composed of
strength and weakness.

**He will truly teach to keep the law.**

12\. He punishes the adversaries and the hypocrites in a hidden way. For
when these hear,

that such goodness should be among Christians, they say: Where then is
the mortification of the flesh, if we are thus to see through the
fingers of the brethren\'s faults? Therefore he says: Christ will truly
teach to keep the law. You boast of the mortification of the flesh, and
pretend to good works; but of the mortification of the passions you know
nothing at all. Christ will teach His own differently, who will kill
this pestilence, presumption and keeping to themselves. If, however, in
the rest of their lives a sin sometimes creeps in, they have the Lord\'s
Prayer in which they ask for forgiveness, and it will be forgiven them.

**V. 4. that he might establish justice on earth.**

He himself will establish this kingdom so that it will be firm and
lasting, no matter how much Satan tries to overthrow it through the
princes in the world. For with the word \"establish\" he indicates the
cross.

**V. 5. Thus says God, the Lord.**

\(14\) Hitherto he has praised Christ to us; this he does also now, only
that he now addresses the speech to the Master himself and to our
leader. All these words: \"I, the Lord, have called you, I have taken
you by your hand,\" 2c., are to be taken exclusively to exclude all
others, that none other than this Christ should be our teacher, as he
also says in the Gospel: \"Him you shall hear\" \[Matth. 17, 5.\]. And
this is also the reason why he boasts of his power, so that he may
emphasize the words and deter us from hearing or following other
teachers.

V. 6. **I, the Lord, have called you with righteousness.**

15 There is an emphasis in the word \"righteousness,\" that is, I have
called you to teach and propagate righteousness. Therefore, apart from
Christ, there is nothing but sin. Moses and all the laws, all the
teachings in the world, except this teaching of Christ, contribute
nothing to the righteousness that is before God.

512 L. xxill, **9-11.** Brief Interpretation On Isaiah, Cap. 42, 6-8.
**W. VI, 814-816.** 513

**I have taken you by the hand.**

16 Because Satan and the world will resist your ministry with all their
justice, power and wisdom. This is what we learn nowadays. For \"the
chariots of God retain the victory,\" but \"in the mud of great
waters,\" Hab. 3:8, 15. But this passage comforts us that God has taken
Christ by the hand. Therefore, we should first hold on to the fact that
this teaching, for the sake of which the world hates us, is Christ\'s
teaching. If this is certain, then the prophet will not deceive us, but
we will learn that God has taken Christ by the hand, and that the word
of the gospel cannot be destroyed by any plots, by any deceptions, by
any violence or cunning. But this grasping by the hand is not visible.
Therefore it happens that the adversaries have the confidence that this
teaching can be suppressed, and that we are sometimes fearful because of
weakness.

**I have given you to the covenant among the people.**

\(17\) Where then is the covenant of Moses and of the law? Thus he
abolishes the whole law with one word and does away with it with all its
righteousness, worship and works. But this passage serves to fortify the
conscience. For since nothing is more harmful than misgivings of
conscience and doubts, he says that Christ is our covenant, so that we
may be assured of the first commandment, that God in Christ, and through
Christ, wants to be our Father and God, that Christ should be the
covenant and the pledge of grace, not any good works that are ours 2c.

**To the light of the Gentiles.**

18\. He is not given for a covenant among the Gentiles, because Christ
was promised to the Jews alone, and was only \"a minister of the
circumcision\" \[Rom. 15, 8.\]. But through this covenant, through this
ministry, the light is spread among the Gentiles.

19 In this passage we must also note that it is exclusive, that other
covenants are excluded, that apart from Christ there is no covenant, no
light, but blindness, and enmity against God and the wrath of God.

V. 7. **That thou mayest open the eyes of the blind.**

Consequently, Christ finds all those to whom he comes \"blind,\" that
is, without knowledge of God, bound and held captive by Satan, by death,
by sin, and by the law. The defenders of free will do not believe
this, 1) the papists do not believe this, Lucian\'s followers, the
mockers of religion, ridicule this. Consequently, apart from the gospel
there is nothing but darkness and prison, so that even if we have some
knowledge, we cannot follow it or act on it because we are bound.

V. 8. **I, the Lord, that is my name.**

Here he again praises his majesty and divinity. For the Holy Spirit
knows that the world hates this leader, Christ, most of all. For why
have so many orders been invented, so many works devised, so many
monasteries and foundations built, than in order to obscure Christ, whom
the entire papacy today hates and persecutes to the utmost? That is why
this prize was necessary.

**I don\'t want to give my honor to anyone else.**

\(22\) Here he makes it evident that he excludes and condemns everything
else that is not Christ\'s word or work. For I had not for it that the
prophet speaks of the deity of Christ, but par excellence of the office
and works of Christ, so that the glory of righteousness must be
understood by it. As if he wanted to say, \"I will give my glory to no
other\"; this Christ alone shall be your righteousness. Those who do not
cling to this Christ in faith are unrighteous and will be condemned,
even if they allow themselves to be killed and, according to
appearances, lead the holiest life. To this one Christ I give my glory,
that he may justify those who believe in him. Therefore, no other crea-

1\) Ho\" k\^psraspistas lidsri arditrii non ersännt. These words are
directed against Erasmus, who had given his writing against Luther\'s
\"Answer to Erasmus that free will is nothing\" the title
H\^psraspistss. Lgl. Walch, St. Louis Edition, vol. XVIII, inset p. 67a.

514 L. XXIII, 11-14. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 816-819.
515

ture, neither in heaven nor on earth, no other work helps to
righteousness.

\(23\) Here you see that the doctrine which teaches the righteousness of
works is blasphemous. And if one hopes to become righteous by works,
this is nothing else than wanting to be God and to strive for godliness.
This blasphemy is followed by the fall of Lucifer. Therefore,
God-fearing hearts should be careful here. But that he calls
righteousness his honor, he hits the heart of the works saints with a
needle, as it were, because they mainly seek honor through all their
works and deeds. Thus Paul says: \"They want you to be circumcised, so
that they may boast of your flesh\" \[Gal. 6:13\].

**Nor my glory to the idols.**

\(24\) Just as today people seek salvation and righteousness through
works, vows, the celibate life, feigned poverty, masses, and other vain
things, so in Isaiah\'s day they believed that they would be justified
through idolatry, the high places, the groves, and other similar
abominations. That is why he mentions idols. For idolatry has always
been in the world, but at different times in different forms.

25 Further, apply this to all forms of the papacy. God will not give His
honor and glory to the impious sacrifice of the Mass, not to a dirty
cap, not to the foolish giving of the head, not to the vain rules of
Benedictus, Dominicus, Augustine 2c., not to the monastic state, not to
chastity, not to poverty, not to obedience, in sum, to no work and no
creature.

**V. 9. 10. Sing to the Lord a new song.**

Now he gives thanks to God, who was considered weak and foolish in the
eyes of the world, for the great benefits he has praised so far. At the
same time, he indicates that there is no other outward service in the
New Testament than thanksgiving. And because he says: \"Sing a
[new]{.underline} song\", he abolishes the whole old service, which was
in the law.

27\. but \"the ends of the world\" and \"the isles\" he remembers for
this reason, so that he may punish the Jews who thought that God should
and can

nowhere to be worshipped but at Jerusalem. As if he wanted to say:
Religion is no longer bound to any place, time or person. For the gospel
will be preached in all the world, and all Christians will be priests,
offering spiritual sacrifices, as the 110th Psalm, v. 3, says, that is,
the sacrifice of praise. For this is to sing, praise, extol, write, read
the benefits of Christ.

**V. 11: Shout aloud, you deserts and the cities within, along with the
villages where Kedar dwells.**

28 With this he points to the Arabs who live in the east, such as the
Ammonites and Nabathaeans 1) and others. All of these, he says, will
praise the Lord for the word of the gospel, which will come to all the
earth, whether cultivated or uncultivated, fortified or unfortified.

**V. 12. Let them give glory to the Lord.**

29\. They will sing the praises of God, and condemn themselves, that is,
their works, their own righteousness and wisdom.

**V. 13. The LORD will go forth like a giant.**

These names: a strong one, a giant, a man of war, 2) zeal 2c. indicate
the cross. Consequently, this kingdom of Christ stands in the midst of
his enemies, that the Lord is compelled to go forth as a man of war. For
he is resisted, and he is oppressed with violence by the tyrants, and
with cunning by the heretics. Therefore, looking at the outward
appearance, the gospel is miserable, not glorious. And the singing, of
which he says here, is very similar to the wailing and crying of the
sighing and distressed. Nevertheless, he strengthens and comforts his
sorrowful singers and weak hearts to endure the cross, for it will
surely happen that God will deliver them from all evil.

**V. 14. I am silent for a while, and I am still.**

31 Here he describes the works of this giant, namely, that he has
destroyed all our adversaries from

1\) About the Nabathaeans compare Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XII,
938,? 7.

2\) In the editions with wrong punctuation: vir, tisllator. The Vulgate
offers: vir proeUator.

[**516** L. xxm, 14-16. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 42, 14-16.
W. VI. 819-822. **517**]{.underline}

will exterminate from the bottom up. Furthermore, the words: \"I am
silent for a time, and am still\" 2c. indicate that no help can be seen,
but everything stands in despair, as if God were holding it against us
with our enemies. But this is the weakness of Christ, through which the
wicked rise up and run the harder against Him, so that He is compelled
to suppress and destroy their cruel and ungodly undertakings. He does
cry out when the godly are oppressed, but his voice is like the voice of
a woman in childbirth; he is despised and taken for one who cannot
resist. But Christ is most powerful when he is thought to be least able,
and help is nearest when it is thought to be farthest away.

\(32\) Furthermore, this should comfort and uplift us, so that we do not
despair when we see that the church is in extreme danger, so that it is
close to destruction. For this is how she must look, as she is described
here, that she is, as it were, a birthing woman against whom the whole
world triumphs; she is to be brought into danger of perishing, and yet
not perish.

**I will lay them waste and devour them all.**

\(33\) It is when Christ is weakest that we must fear him the most.
Therefore, the godly should have good faith even in the midst of the
greatest weakness and when they are oppressed. On the other hand, the
wicked should fear even in the midst of triumph and victory. But this is
based on the word of faith; in fact, it cannot be seen; indeed, the
contradiction is before our eyes.

**V. 15. I will lay waste mountains and hills.**

34 These are figurative words. \"Mountains\" are all those who stand out
in the world with their righteousness and wisdom. In particular,
however, he uses it to refer to the unbelieving synagogue, which was in
blossom with regard to religion, wisdom, promises and the examples of
the fathers. The \"grass\" can be taken for the disciples, the trees for
the prophets. Or perhaps it is more paffing to take the grass for the
Word of God and the

The people of the lakes are the people who have lost the simple
Scriptures that the Jews and the papacy of today have lost. \"The
lakes\" are the people to whom everything goes well. We still see this
today in the Jews and all other enemies of Christ. Where is Arius today?
Where is Manichaeus? Where are the other heretics? The same will happen
to those who today desecrate the Word and Sacraments of Christ.

**V. 16. But I will guide the blind in the way they do not know.**

35 He calls the godly believers \"blind,\" who see neither help nor
counsel in their darkness and affliction, indeed, no end to their misery
before them. Therefore they take hold of the word, which shines in the
darkness, guides them on the way they do not know, that is, in the faith
of things to come, which are not seen, and comforts and raises up the
weak souls so that they do not despair.

This is an excellent passage, which contains the very important lesson
that in all danger, in all hardships, in all temptations, we should
close our eyes and follow the word. For those who want to see in dangers
and look around for remedies and advice make the pain even worse and do
nothing but struggle in vain and are doubly miserable. We have been
shown another way to live in the midst of danger, to close our eyes and
believe that although we are blind, God is not blind, but sees the
outcome of the temptation, as it says in 1 Cor. 10:13. Even if you were
in the depths of the sea, as Jonah was, God sees the way and the manner
by which He leads you out. For who prepared the way for Jonah? He was
not only blind, but in twofold darkness. So shall we also be blind, and
see nothing, that he himself may see all things alone. That is why he
wants us to be like children \[Matth. 18, 3\].

\(37\) But the adversaries and all the wicked are not children,
therefore they have open eyes, they see and seek always many ways and
means by which they would oppress us. But we are blind, so that our Lord
Christ Himself may give us understanding, and His

[**518** L. XXIII, 16-19. Interpretations on the prophets. Ä. VI,
822-82P. **519**]{.underline}

He has kept his eyes open over and against us, as he has often done in
our time. He has protected us from all the dangers that have been
devised against us in great numbers these years; he has nullified so
many imperial diets of the princes, at which they have taken counsel
over our heads. And indeed, what was this Diet of Augsburg but darkness,
in which we wandered about as blind men? But the darkness has been made
light before us. The same will happen in the future, if we are firm in
our faith and constant in our words. An example of this blindness is
presented to us in the case of the Israelites at the Red Sea, where they
had to perish and yet were preserved.

\(38\) Furthermore, not only in bodily calamities must we follow this
advice, that we close our eyes, that is, that we do not mat ourselves
down with carnal temptations, but command the cause of God, but also
much more in spiritual temptations. Now, if you are tempted by Satan and
cannot perceive a way to get out of it, close your eyes and answer
nothing, and command the cause of God. And this is the highest wisdom of
Christians, which we should follow even at the hour of death. There the
flesh trembles that it must go to a new life, and doubts the
blessedness. If you follow these thoughts, you are lost. Therefore, even
here you must close your eyes, and say with St. Stephen \[Apost. 7,
58.\], \"O Lord JEsu, into thy hands I commend my spirit.\" And then the
Lord JEsus will surely be there with his angels, guiding you on the way.
This is it that he says, \"I will make darkness light before them.\" For
faith is this light, which takes hold of the word, that we may thus come
out of all dangers. That is why Peter and David also called the word a
lamp to our feet \[Ps. 119, 105. 2 Petr. 1, 19.\].

**V. 17. conversi sunt retrorsum. 1)**

39\. more void are these sentences thus ordered: \"But they that trust
in idols, and say unto the molten image, Ye are our gods;

1\) With this sentence v. 17 begins in the Vulgate.

they shall return, and be put to shame.\" The opinion is clear: Those
who do not believe in Christ and do not want to close their eyes shall
perish with their eyes open. We see examples of this today.

**V. 18 Hear, you deaf; and look, you blind, that you may see.**

40 Thus he chides the unbelieving Jews. Because he speaks here of other
blind people than above. He calls them blind men, and thus reproaches
them. You have prophets, you have lovely and rich promises; but you are
blind, you are deaf, you do not care about the word, and rather hear and
see everything else than the word, since all wisdom of the godly is in
the word and in hearing 2c.

**V. 19. Who is so blind as my servant?**

41\. He calls his servants the chief priests and the priests, and those
who were in the ministry of the word. Of these he says that they are
blind. This is a frightening saying; however, it comforts us against the
nonsensical clamor of the papists, who think that we are not so much
cornered by any other evidence as by this, when they reproach us with
the multitude of bishops and popes, all of whom could not possibly have
been mistaken. This is also what the Jews could say against Isaiah, as
we can see from this passage. For these were also appointed to be
leaders of the people; they had the office and the rule over the holy
people, and had even more certain proofs that they were the church and
God\'s people than our adversaries. And yet the text says they were
blind and mistaken. The Latin translation did not get it right here. For
one must read like this: \"Who is so deaf as my messenger whom I send?
Who is so blind as the perfect one?\" But he calls him a perfect one,
not in respect of his person, but of his office, because they are on the
highest level of dignity and office, namely in the preaching office.

**V. 20: They preached a lot, but they did not have it. (Qui vides
multa, nonne custodies?)**

42\. here he describes more clearly what kind of people they are, namely
chatterers, and the same

[**520** L- xxm. is-21. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 42, 20-24.
W. vi. bss-sss. **521**]{.underline}

Who are willing to teach; who teach many things, and yet in fact teach
nothing. They believe and rather teach everything else than the doctrine
of faith. For villero means so much as to teach, to preach. Hence comes
the word \"seers,\" that is, the prophets. Similar is the following,
\"They are told enough, but they will not hear.\" For as the teacher is,
so is the disciple. Paul also says: \"They are always learning, and can
never come to the knowledge of the truth\" (2 Tim. 3:7). We have
experienced this in the papacy. There was a great number of teachers,
there was also a great number of listeners; and yet, who was there in
such a great number of teachers and listeners, who would have had a
verse from the Psalter, one of the ten commandments, a piece of the
Lord\'s Prayer? But it is a terrible ingratitude that we forget all
this, and are not more awake to the word of God, which is now so
abundantly scattered among us.

**V. 21. The Lord is still pleased with them because of His
righteousness (Et Dominus voluit, ut sanctificaret).**

43 Translate thus: \"It pleased the Lord in his righteousness to make
the law glorious and great. But the people\" 2c., so that it is the same
with what Christ says Matth. 11, 25: \"I praise you, Father, that you
have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them to babes.\" For he is speaking of the rejection of human
righteousness, and of the establishment of the righteousness of God. As
if to say: God did not reject the synagogue because He delighted in
error, but He delighted in His righteousness. He cannot make this great,
he cannot establish it, if he does not put to shame the righteousness of
works. He cannot make us Gentiles righteous and blessed by his
righteousness unless he corrupts those who despise the righteousness
that is offered in vain, so that they repulse, fall back and perish. So
now he has

1\) In the edition of 1532: Ro\" pntest vos A6Q \"te., while in the
Wittenberg, in the Jenaer and in the Erlanger: Ron potost of itself
finds. The latter does not seem to us to be admissible.

his delight in his righteousness, to make the law great, that is, to
make a nice and wonderful law, namely the law of faith (after the old
law of Moses has been done away with), by which we are justified without
any merits and works, by faith alone, which takes hold of Christ and the
grace given to us through Christ 2c. Those who do not want this new law
of faith are a robbed and plundered people, that is, they are exposed to
the wolves and seducers who rob and plunder them.

\(44\) Therefore, the article of justification, which is the only one we
teach today, should be diligently learned and held fast. For if we have
lost this, we shall not be able to resist any heresy, any false
doctrine, however ridiculous and void it may be, as it was under the
pope, when we believed such things of which we are now ashamed and
repent. Again, if we stick to this article, we are safe from heresy, and
retain the forgiveness of sins that weakness in walk and faith credits
us with. But we do not need a more extensive interpretation of this
passage; we must only think back to the papacy, and look at what was
believed there, what was done, what was suffered, and it will be clear
what is meant by \"being robbed and plundered, being entrapped,
imprisonment,\" and other such things.

**V. 23: Who is there among you who will listen to these things?**

This is a lament, as it were, by which he endeavors to cheer them up. It
pains me that you are told this in vain, that there is no one who
believes in it. Therefore, God is forced to punish you who reject the
offered grace, yes, even persecute it. But he speaks primarily of the
final destruction of the Jews and the synagogue, and looks to the times
of Christ, whose righteousness the godless synagogue has despised.

**V. 24: Who gave Jacob over to plunder?**

46\. because they have been torn from the faith, they have been
subjected to plunder and all evil.

**520 19-21.** Brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 42, 20-24. **W. VI,
825-828. 521**

Who are willing to teach; who teach many things, and yet in fact teach
nothing. They believe and rather teach everything else than the doctrine
of faith. For videre means as much as to teach, to preach. Hence comes
the word \"seers,\" that is, the prophets. Similar is the following,
\"They are told enough, but they will not hear.\" For as the teacher is,
so is the disciple. Paul also says: \"They are always learning, and can
never come to the knowledge of the truth\" \[2 Tim. 3:7\]. But we have
experienced this in the papacy. There was a great number of teachers,
there was also a great number of listeners; and yet, who was there in
such a great number of teachers and listeners, who would have had a
verse from the Psalter, one of the Ten Commandments, a piece of the
Lord\'s Prayer? But it is a terrible ingratitude that we forget all
this, and are not more awake to the word of God, which is now so
abundantly spread among us.

**V. 21. The Lord is still pleased with them because of His
righteousness (Et Dominus voluit, ut sanctificaret).**

43 Translate thus: \"It pleased the Lord in his righteousness to make
the law glorious and great. But the people\" 2c., so that it is the same
with what Christ says Matth. II, 25: \"I praise you, Father, that you
have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them to babes.\" For he is speaking of the rejection of human
righteousness, and of the establishment of the righteousness of God. As
if to say: God did not reject the synagogue because He delighted in
error, but He delighted in His righteousness. He cannot make this great,
he cannot establish it, unless he puts to shame the righteousness of
works. He cannot 1) make the Gentiles righteous and blessed by his
righteousness, unless he corrupts those who despise the righteousness
offered in vain, so that they repel, fall back and perish. So now he has

1\) In the 1532 edition: pntsst vos

\"te., while in the Wittenberg, in the Jena and in the Erlangen: Xon
poterst nou is found. The latter does not seem to us to be admissible.

his delight in his righteousness, to make the law great, that is, to
make a new and wonderful law, namely the law of faith (after the old law
of Moses has been done away with), by which we are justified without any
merits and works, by faith alone, which takes hold of Christ and the
grace given to us through Christ 2c. Those who do not want this new law
of faith are a robbed and plundered people, that is, they are exposed to
the wolves and seducers who rob and plunder them.

\(44\) Therefore, the article of justification, which is the only one we
teach today, should be diligently learned and held fast. For if we have
lost this, we shall not be able to resist any heresy, any false
doctrine, however ridiculous and void it may be, as it was under the
pope, when we believed such things of which we are now ashamed and
repent. Again, if we stick to this article, we are safe from heresy, and
retain the forgiveness of sins which weakness in walk and faith credits
to us. But we do not need a more extensive interpretation of this
passage; we must only think back to the papacy, and look at what was
believed there, what was done, what was suffered, and it will be clear
what is meant by \"being robbed and plundered, being entrapped,
imprisonment,\" and other such things.

**V. 23: Who is there among you who will listen to these things?**

This is a lament, as it were, by which he endeavors to cheer them up. It
pains me that you are told this in vain, that there is no one who
believes in it. Therefore, God is forced to punish you who reject the
offered grace, yes, even persecute it. But he speaks primarily of the
final destruction of the Jews and the synagogue, and looks to the times
of Christ, whose righteousness the godless synagogue has despised.

**V. 24. Who did Jacob go over to plunder?**

46\. because they have been torn from the faith, they have been
subjected to plunder and all evil.

522 k. xxin, 21-23. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. \[ss-W\" 523

The heretics are subjected to happiness and error. Therefore, it is not
by the strength of the devil, but by the permission of the angry and
punishing God that the heretics have such a large number of disciples.
But he hereby refutes the presumption of the Jews, who did not believe
that they should be punished because they were God\'s people. Therefore
he adds: \"Did not the Lord do it?\" namely, on whom you defy.

**V. 25. Therefore he poured out the fury of his wrath on them.**

47 Namely, about those who have not wanted to accept the grace offered
through Christ. Note the emphasis in

He has poured out\", but he has showered them with torrents of wrath, as
we still see in the Jews, who teach and believe the most insipid things
and are full of all kinds of horrible blasphemies. The same can be seen
in the papists, who nevertheless cruelly contest the revealed truth that
they recognize.

**And a war power.**

48 Namely, by the wolves, heretics and evil spirits, because they fall
from one error into another. The fact that he adds, \"But they do not
realize it,\" indicates that it has not yet been revealed.

**The Forty-Third Chapter.**

He continues to comfort the church gathered from the rest of the
synagogue, which has departed from the law and followed the
righteousness of faith, which the prophet has treated in various ways.
But just as above \[Cap. 42 1) he comforted the church against the
special and public temptations into which Satan and the world plunge
her, so now he actually comforts her against the distress that there are
so few of them. Paul also takes a lot of trouble with this reason,
because it seems to be inconsistent that God rejected the whole people
and chose a few, even the most despised ones, especially since the
promises were made to the whole people \[Rom. 15, 8. 9, 4. 5.\]. And
this example terrifies the weak souls. For when they see that the
synagogue is rejected, they think that he will use the same wrath
against them.

**V. 1. And now says the LORD who created you, Jacob.**

2 These are fervent words with which he comforts his church, and
especially the apostles with the rest of the Jews. \"I have comforted
you

I created you, I made you, 1) do not fear\"; everything you teach, do,
believe is my gift and my work. \"I have redeemed you,\" since you were
imprisoned under Moses and under the law. This oppose the reasons of
those who call you a creature of the devil and rebellious. But these
words will have a right emphasis only when you look at the person who
speaks this.

**I have called you by your name.**

3\. he distinguishes the synagogue from the church. As if to say: I have
set you apart from the unbelieving synagogue to a new people of faith.

**You are mine. 2)**

I take you into my possession, that all you are and do may be mine.
Thus, when the church teaches, baptizes, Christ teaches and baptizes.
When she suffers, Christ suffers, as he says in Acts Cap. 9, 4. \"Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me?\"

1\) In the editions: ürrnavi, for which with the Vulgate Lornaavi will
be read. After that we have translated.

2\) Erlanger: mons instead of: msus. This is not a misprint, but the
correct reading is given as a variant of Jena.

524 **L.** xxm, **23-26.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 43, 2-4.
**W. VI, 832-83P.** 525

**V. 2: For if you pass through the water.**

\(5\) These are excellent consolations, which I generally take from all
afflictions. You must not think that you are alone and abandoned; I will
be with you in all adversity; I will comfort, strengthen and protect
you. That is why the church suffers wherever it wants. Therefore, it is
easy to see that the pope and his followers are not the church, because
they do not cry from anything but the temporal cross.

\(6\) But the prophet also covertly indicates the effort and the
devilish hatred of the wicked, with which they are inflamed against the
church, that they wish and strive to flood it as with a flood of sin,
and to consume it completely as with a conflagration. But here we have a
good comfort against such threats, that we will be preserved, although
there is no way to escape. And certainly, this promise has made all the
attempts of the adversaries fruitless, destroyed so many imperial diets,
even the last one at Augsburg, which seemed to be the most terrible. But
if we cling to such promises with firm faith and add to them prayer, we
will also experience that we will be safe from all violence and
injustice.

V. 3. **For I am the LORD your God, the Holy One of Israel.**

7 He adds: \"I am the Holy One in Israel. As if he wanted to say: I am
the same God that I have always been; I have not changed, as you judge.
I am with you, not with the unbelieving synagogue. For the apostles to
separate themselves from the synagogue has the appearance of apostasy
and rebellion. For they hold that they are God\'s people, and that the
synagogue is not God\'s people. Here the heart must necessarily be
challenged more often: How if you err? How if you were rejected and they
were preserved? For it is not likely that God should reject so great a
multitude, and hold two or three fishermen higher than a whole people.

8 It is the same with us now. We separate ourselves from the pope
because he denies and persecutes the word, and we

boast that we are Christ\'s church, but the pope and his followers are
the church of the Antichrist. Therefore, the pope judges us to be rebels
and heretics, since we have fully separated from the church in which we
were baptized and taught. But the fault is not ours. We have not
separated from them, rather they are separating from us; indeed, they
are pushing us and our word out of their church. Here we too must
necessarily conclude that the Holy One in Israel is with us, and not
with the pope.

**I have given Egypt, Moor and Seba in your place for atonement.**

To give credence to his words, he repeats the past benefits. This great
change in the synagogue and the church is just as if I were a different
God now than I was before. But do not be offended by it, you small
flock; for I am the same God who has often turned the punishment you
deserved upon your enemies, and given your enemies in your place. I will
do the same now, no matter how much you are a small and oppressed herd.
Therefore do not let your small number or the great multitude of your
enemies trouble you. For if they seem to plunder thee, they themselves
shall be plundered and spoiled. Furthermore, Seba is the capital of the
land of the Moors.

V. 4. **Because you are so esteemed in my sight, you must also be
glorious.**

He calls the church \"glorious. Where? \"Before me.\" For both our
conscience, and the thing itself, and the whole world say the contrary.
Therefore, when we see that everything looks as if it were lost, that
nothing in the whole world is less and more despised than we are, that
we are weighted down with our own sins and the sins of others, that we
are weak in faith and walk, that we are also sometimes unclean in the
eyes of our brethren, if they have anything to reproach in us; when we
see these things, I say, we must turn our eyes from the outward
appearance, and fix them on such promises as will show us, not what the
world or

526 xxm\> 26-28. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 835-838. 527

Our brothers or we ourselves think of us, but what God thinks of us
sorrowful sinners; namely, that as despised as we are in the world, as
desperate sinners as we are in our eyes, as weak as we are in the eyes
of our brothers, we are nevertheless worthy and the most glorious before
the face of the one who speaks here 2c. And indeed, this outward
appearance that we see is the true mortification, the true lowliness and
contrition.

**And I love you.**

11 All this serves to comfort the inexpressible groaning of the heart,
of which Paul speaks Rom. 8:26. \"I love thee,\" saith he; that is, if
thou goest by thy sensation and outward appearance, it seemeth as if I
hated and condemned thee greatly. For so says my conscience in
temptation, and considers GOD an executioner and tyrant. Therefore, we
should learn not to judge according to our feelings, but according to
the word of God.

**That is why I give people in your place.**

\(12\) If you follow the sentiment, the opposite is true. For the
Christians alone are afflicted, the others are unharmed and well. But it
is a general promise. If other men shall seem more righteous, mightier,
holier 2c. than thou, but thou shalt be condemned of all as a dead and
heretical member, arise, and look unto me, because thou art a precious
jewel in my sight, because thou shalt be glorified, and men shall be
given in thy stead.

V. 5. **Fear not therefore, for I am with you.**

13 He continues to comfort the church, which is troubled by the small
number of believers and the great multitude of unbelievers. \"Fear
not,\" he says, \"you will be fruitful and have many children. \"I will
bring your seed from the morning, and gather you from the evening,\"
that is, from all parts of the world. There will be people everywhere
who will confess my name and my religion. But that he adds the words of
command:

V. 6. do **not resist 2c.,**

14 In this way, he covertly indicates that the wicked oppose it with
force and cunning, so that the church does not grow and the word is not
spread further. We see more examples of this today than we would like.

**V. 7. All those who are called by my name.**

15 \[Instead of: Et omnem, qui invocat nomen meum translate, \"All who
are called by my! Names are called.\" But it is as it were a description
of a Christian. For they have the name of Christ, and are called by the
name of Christ, not by their name. Therefore they are also something by
the righteousness of Christ, and not by their works or doings.

**Namely, whom I have created for my glory.**

\(16\) Before, by natural birth, he sought his own glory; but now,
having become a new creature by the Holy Spirit, he does nothing,
suffers nothing, hears nothing, speaks nothing, but what relates to the
glory of God. Thus the gospel condemns all human deeds and works, and
preaches the righteousness of the one Christ. Whoever can say, do and
live all these things from the heart is created for the glory of God and
is a new creature of God.

17 Furthermore, here too the world judges the opposite, and calls the
godly a devil\'s work, condemning them as heretics. Therefore, this
consolation is necessary.

\(18\) If anyone wants to carefully distinguish these three words, \"to
create\" is as much as to make a godly person out of an ungodly one;
\"to prepare\" is as much as to adorn with the gifts of the Holy Spirit,
namely with faith, which alone prepares a new creature; \"to make\" is
as much as to complete the work, that everything a Christian speaks and
does is God\'s work and pleases God. Thus, all Christianity lies apart
from us, in the righteousness of Christ and the mercy of God.

V. 8. 9. **Let the blind people come forth.**

19\. he calls on the saints of works, as he has already done above
\[Cap. 41, 21. ff.\], and

**528 .** um, **28-31.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 43, 8-14.
**W. VI, 838-841. 529**

calls them a blind people, because they are not certain about anything,
because they cannot predict or teach anything certain.

**V. 10 But you are my witnesses, 1) says the Lord.**

20 He is actually speaking to the apostles, whom he comforts and
strengthens, so that they will not be offended by the fact that so few
follow Christ and the majority of the people are rejected. Do not be
offended, he says, that there are so few of you. For you are my
witnesses and witnesses of my words. It is my word that you teach;
therefore it is certain, and you have no reason to think that I have now
become another God, because I have abolished the word of the law and
commanded to preach the gospel. Your word and your teaching pleases me;
the teaching of the unbelieving synagogue does not please me.

This is a great comfort for the apostles and bishops. But as in the
preceding 10 ff\], so also here the opposite is before the world. For
our doctrine is condemned as heretical and detestable to God.

**V. 11-13. Thus I am God. Also I am before, for never was no day.**

22\. All this is said for the comfort of the church, which was
established from the remnant of the Jews and the Gentiles, so that it
would not think that God is now a different God than He was before. For
he has not been changed, but only the word has been changed. Just as he
stood by the old people, he also wants to stand by the new people; they
should only not despair, or, moved by the aversions of the Gospel, fall
away from the word of the Gospel.

**And is no stranger among you.**

\(23\) Namely, not a foreign god. As if he wanted to say: If you have
accepted this word of the gospel, do not doubt that you have and worship
the true and one God, who has always been. For because the Jews take the
promises carnally, when they see that Christ is in such

1\) In the editions estis, for which the Vulgate reads töstes.

great weakness, the conclusion: Either this is not Christ, or God is not
God. For he has promised another Christ; not one crucified, but a
glorious one. Against these ungodly opinions he strengthens the hearts
of the godly at this point.

**You are my witnesses, says the Lord.**

\(24\) He repeats these words as if to say, \"Make your hearts firm and
believe that you are my people and that I am your God, even though the
synagogue contradicts this and says that they are my people and condemns
you as apostates and heretics.

**And is no one who can save from my hand.**

25\. I am the same God that I have always been, so I will preserve and
protect you, my people, however few and despised you may be. But your
adversaries I will condemn and destroy, so that they shall not be able
to hinder you when you spread my word into the whole world. For he
indicates here that the adversaries of his people are many, against whom
he promises his protection.

V. 14. **Thus says the Lord your Redeemer.**

\(26\) He continues to clear away the trouble, as if God and religion
had been changed, and proves with the previous deeds that he is the same
God that he has always been. I, he says, am the same God who gave Cyrus
to redeem you. I am the same God who drowned Pharaoh in the Red Sea and
led you through the sea unharmed.

27 Furthermore, the consideration of time makes this passage obscure.
For he speaks as if he were in the New Testament, and lists the benefits
of the Old Testament, and the return that happened through Cyrus, as
already past, while it happened a long time after Isaiah.

\(28\) But actually by these examples he gave to understand the thoughts
of the ungodly synagogue. For they said thus: I will follow the God of
my fathers, who brought us back from Egypt and Babylon.

530xxm , 31-33. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, sii-844. 531

I do not want to follow Christ. Therefore Christ answers: I am the same
who did all these things; therefore believe in me and do not think that
I am a foreign god. I am your Redeemer, who on the cross, by my death,
redeemed you from the bondage of sins and death. I am the Holy One in
Israel, who sanctifies the believers; as Paul calls the church \"the
sanctified in Christ JEsu\", 1 Cor. 1, 2. Therefore, if you believe in
God, believe also in me.

**For your sake I have sent to Babylon.**

He tells the future history as a past one. For he speaks to the church
of the New Testament. I am the one, he says, who awakened Cyrus, that he
should destroy the monarchy of the Babylonians and bring you back.

30 Furthermore, this passage contains a theological sentence that the
Assyrian empire was destroyed not only because of its sins, but
primarily for the sake of the people of God, who were to be liberated.
Therefore, Cyrus with his entire monarchy was a servant and bondservant
of the people of God. In the same way, the Roman Empire under Augustus
served the Church, so that after peace was established, the Gospel could
be spread among all nations without hindrance. This is a great glory of
the Church, that she has such great monarchs for servants. But who sees
this glory? For it is hidden from the eyes of the world.

31 He calls the princes of the Assyrian monarchy, which Cyrus
suppressed, \"bars.

V. 15-17: **He who makes way in strong waters.**

32\. it is I who brought you through the red sea unharmed, and drowned
Pharaoh your enemy, as when someone extinguishes a wick in water.

V. 18. Do **not remember the old.**

Here he concludes: \"Since I, Christ, am the same God who did all these
things, forsake the law, accept the new word of the gospel, and believe
that you have and worship the true God who was from the beginning. But
it is clear,

that this passage is about the law, which is exalted at the same time as
the priesthood and the kingdom of the law. Furthermore, although the
promises are in the law, they do not belong to the law. Therefore, he
does not abolish them in the New Testament, but gives them and fulfills
them through Christ, his Son.

**V. 19. 20. That I may make ways in the wilderness.**

\(34\) I opened a way in the sea in the past; I will do the same now, so
that you may know that I am the same God; but I will do it in a way. The
church has a way in the wilderness. For she is plagued by the flesh, by
Satan, and by the world in many ways; she walks in the dry land, she
suffers hunger and thirst, as it says in 1 Cor. 4:11. This is the sea,
this is the desert of the church in which it walks, and yet it finds a
way through the sea. For she breaks through all these adversities in
divine power. In the desert she finds water. For Christ comforts and
strengthens her with his spirit and word.

35 He calls the princes of the world \"beasts of the field,\" many of
whom will be converted. Notice that he does not say that he will take
away the beasts of the field and the wilderness, but he promises that
they will have comfort and happiness in the midst of all these things,
and that they will break through the tribulations.

V. 21: **This people I have prepared for myself.**

Here he begins to distinguish one people from another, and the Jewish
people from the believing church. At the same time, he abolishes all the
sacrifices of the Old Testament and establishes new ones. Those
sacrifices of yours, he says, were preludes to those to come, and did
not make righteous. But the true sacrifices that please me are: to tell
my praise, to glorify me. This cannot be done unless you condemn
yourselves and all your doings 2c.

There is a great emphasis in every word. It is a people who do not dress
themselves, like the works saints, but are dressed by Christ. And it is
made ready, not for its own praise, but for the praise of Christ. These
are the true

**532** 2 xxiii, **33-36.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 43,
21-26. W. vi, **841-848. 533**

Sacrifice, preaching Christ and praising him, condemning our own
righteousness and doings. This is the true burnt offering, this is
slaughtering animals and burning them completely with fire, so that
nothing remains of our powers and deeds.

**V. 22. 23. Not that you would have called me 2c.**

The pronoun \"me\" and \"to me\" must be diligently observed throughout
this passage. You have called, you have worked, you have sacrificed 2c.,
but not \"to me.\" For all works, even if they are commanded and holy by
GOD, if they are done in the opinion of becoming righteous thereby, are
an ungodly service. Therefore he repeats again and again the pronoun
with the negation: Not to me or me. For this is idolatry, to hope for
righteousness by works, which is obtained only by faith in Christ\'s
death.

\(39\) What then do the papists say to this passage? If the services
instituted by God Himself, if the works commanded by God Himself have
not helped righteousness, what will the monastic orders, the caps, the
mass, the vows, and all the exceedingly foolish antics of the entire
papacy, which they have undertaken without God\'s word, help? It is a
desperate blindness if they do not fall silent at the mention of this
passage and recognize their errors.

**V. 24. You have not satisfied me with the fatness of your
sacrifices.**

40 That is: I cannot be reconciled by all your works, none of them is
sufficient for me.

**Yes, you have made work for me in your sins.**

41 \[Instead of: Veruntamen servire me fecisti\] translate better like
this: \"You have done me work. This is an excellent passage, that all
the righteousnesses of the law, all the works, no matter how great, no
matter how holy, no matter how apparent, are of no help in attaining
righteousness before God, but are only sins for which Christ had to do
enough and take pains. But this is our

Justice, that Christ has had work. And this article has only our faith
and our religion; the whole world knows nothing about it. For all other
doctrines judge thus: He who has sinned shall be punished. But this
article teaches the contradiction, namely, that we sin, and another is
sufficient for sin, and takes the punishment of sins upon himself; as
John says, \"Behold, this is the Lamb of God, which bareth the sin of
the world\" \[John 1:29\]. Therefore, no punishment that is upon us is
enough, not even for the smallest sin. But the punishment of the only
Christ was enough for all sin.

Therefore, because this doctrine does not agree with reason, so many
sects, so many kinds of atonement, so many works have been invented by
which men strive, but in vain, to do enough for their sins. Therefore,
this passage must be diligently considered. For it contains the most
important articles of our faith. He says that he was worshipped by the
nations, therefore he indicates that he is God. Likewise, he says that
he worked, therefore he became man and died for our sin. However, he is
not overcome, but he only has trouble, therefore he rises again from
death 2c.

**V. 25. I, I blot out your transgression for my own sake.**

The text not only teaches, but also refutes. For it contains very
important contrasts. \"Oh, I,\" not you; \"for my sake,\" not for your
sake, or for your works. Thus he abolishes all works and all doings by
which men want to redeem their sins.

**V. 26. Declare how you will be righteous.**

44\. He challenges the works saints who dared to be justified by the
works of the law. Now, if you know any other way by which you may be
justified, tell it. For that you boast that you received your rules of
life and laws from your fathers, I am not interested in that. For your
fathers also were sinners. Because ye now execute a more arid
righteousness, therefore will I reject you with all your righteousness
and works. He just says

534 k. xxm, M-z8. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 848-882. 535

What is written in the Acts of the Apostles \[Cap. 4, 12, Vulg.\]:
\"There is no other name under heaven in which we can be saved. Now
whatever you bring forward to establish your righteousness apart from
Christ and without Christ is condemned, ungodly and blasphemous.

V. 27. **Your forefathers sinned.**

I do not understand it of Adam and of original sin, but I generally take
the singular for the plural, that with it he wants to refute the common
reason of proof that has been used for all lines, since they hold up to
us the reputation of the fathers; as they say today: I want to follow
the faith of my ancestors. Is it likely that so many centuries should
have been mistaken, and so many holy men should not have known the way
of truth? 2c. He says, \"Your forefathers also sinned.\"

46 But this passage is well to be remembered. For this is how it
generally happens that the descendants of the body and the outward
appearance do not follow the deeds or the faith of the fathers, as we
can see what great trouble followed the example of Abraham, when he was
commanded to sacrifice his son. For they looked only at the work in and
for itself; but at the command which preceded the work, and at the faith
in which Abraham wished to carry out the command, they did not look.
Therefore, they left the kernel and kept the shell of the nut, just as
our papists do, who do not follow the rules and orders of the fathers.

and then, out of great and special wisdom, say that they were not evil
men, but that they deserved that we should also follow their lives. But
the faith, which should be the same for all the saints, and the word,
which is the leader and teacher of faith, they abandon.

**And your teachers have mistreated me.**

He speaks of the doctrine and the rules of life. He says: \"In all that
they teach, they do not look at the core of the law, that is, at the
promises of Christ; but in the meantime they make much for themselves
with the outward veneer of works and sacrifices. Thus he rejects both
the teachers of the people and the fathers who instructed them.

**V. 28. Therefore I have desecrated the princes of the sanctuary.**

48 He calls them \"princes of the sanctuary\", as it says of them in
Romans 9:4, 5: \"To whom belongs the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenant, and the law, and the service, and the promises; to whom also
belong the fathers, from whom Christ came according to the flesh\" 2c.

**And have made Jacob a ban.**

\(49\) That is, to utterly reject the people, together with all the law
and all the worship of the law, so that they, with all their doctrine
and life, become a reproach and an abomination, and not righteousness,
as they think they are. We say the same of the papacy today.

**The Forty-Fourth Chapter.**

In the three previous chapters, he discussed the righteousness of faith.
He praised this righteousness and the gospel in many ways. He also
refuted his own righteousness, and added various consolations for the
godly, and threats against the wicked who contend against this
righteousness.

Finally he has abolished the whole law together with the priesthood and
the kingdom. Now he concludes this whole thing, as it were, with a final
speech. As if he wanted to say: \"That I summarize it briefly: by this
righteousness we must be preserved, or we will perish with the ungodly.
But as it is usual in the closing speeches, so

536 L. xxm, 38-4o. Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 44, 1-9. W. vi.
8S2-8SS. 537

he adds admonitions and consolations. For he promises the church a seed
and offspring.

**V. 1. Listen now, my servant Jacob.**

2, He addresses the people of the gospel who were chosen from the
synagogue. You who are my servants from this people, that is, you who
believe or are obedient to the faith; who, though you have been banished
by others, yet serve me and are grateful: \"Hear\".

**V. 2. 3. For I will pour water on the thirsty.**

He confesses that the church is thirsty and arid because it is in
constant heat and sees nothing but its condemnation and shame. Therefore
he says: \"Fear not\", I will shower you with fruitful rain, that a rich
seed may grow for you. I will give the Holy Spirit to comfort and water
thee, that thou mayest not lack offspring to spread the gospel. For it
is a comfort that the church should not despair in the present
tribulation, but hope that God will give it a numerous offspring,
although the wrath of the world and of Satan threaten the opposite. For
the Holy Spirit does not depart from the Word, but is active through the
Word.

**V. 4. that they should grow.**

4 He hereby looks at the first psalm. The blessing of the church will be
as abundant as the grass in the meadows. The pastures have an
exceedingly good prosperity. Therefore, through them he indicates the
power of the blessing, that the word will gain a happy progress against
all the violence of the world.

**V. 5. This one will say, I am the Lord\'s.**

These words are to be taken distributively. Christians will be scattered
now and then throughout the world. As if he wanted to say: Here and
there and everywhere there will be Christians.

**And that one will be called by the name of Jacob.**

6 This is a very clear passage of the calling of the Gentiles to follow
the Jews and the

Children of Abraham shall be made like, and called by their names. For
this passage must be understood by those who were not previously called
by the name of Jacob, nor descended in the flesh from Jacob, but from
the Gentiles. But one must carefully note such scriptural passages in
which the transmission of the name, the lineage, and the inheritance is
promised: that Jacob is not only the one to whom the promise was made,
but also the Gentiles. So also it is said in Ps. 87:5, \"It shall be
said in Zion, that all manner of people shall be born therein.\" For he
speaks in this place of the Gentiles of Tyre, Sidon, Egypt 2c. But this
is the only grievance of the synagogue, by which it is offended, and
therefore falls away from Christ, that the Gentiles should be made like
unto them.

**And this one will ascribe himself with his hand to the Lord.**

7 That is, he will confess the Lord so that there is no difference
between the Gentiles and us Jews, as Peter says in Acts \[Cap. 15, 9.\]:
\"God made no difference between them and us.\"

**V. 6-8. I am the first, and I am the last.**

This is the second part \[of this chapter\], namely a refutation of the
adversaries, so that the Jews would not think that Christ was a new and
different God. As if he wanted to say: ^q^) Do not be offended that I
reject the law and the people of the law. For I am the Almighty God, who
I have been from the beginning.

**V. 9. Their idolaters are all vain.**

9 He now mocks the idolaters in order to strengthen and encourage the
hearts of the godly, so that they may consider from what great errors
they have been redeemed and that they thank God for such a great
benefit.

\(10\) Thus we are also strengthened in our doctrine when we remember
the impiety and folly of the papal religion. Des-

q\) Instead of the preceding, the 1532 edition says: .This is equal to
what was said before.

538 k. xxm, 4o-43. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 8S5-8ss. 539

Half advise us against those who do not want the abominations of the
pabacy to be illuminated in sermons. For Satan\'s intention is that,
after these abominations have been cleared out of the way, he will lead
us back into piety through the appearance of spirituality (religionis).
Therefore, it is useful to keep the abominations of the monastic life,
the satisfaction, the saying of mass, purgatory, the invocation of the
saints, the apparitions of the spirits, and other abominable things,
always before one\'s eyes, so that the heart may be filled with hatred
for them and not fall back into the former godlessness. For thus we see
that also here Isaiah, for the very same purpose, mentions the doings
and nature of the idolaters, and we are at the same time encouraged to
thank God for this supreme benefit, that we have been delivered from
such great ungodliness and transferred into the light of the Gospel.

11 But it is to be noted that he adds: \"And their most precious things
are of no avail.\" That is, their best works, which they do in idolatry,
their most holy efforts, to which they ascribe life and blessedness, are
nothing.

\(12\) As Isaiah says this of the idolaters of his time, so we are to
apply this passage to our times, that the most beautiful works of the
priesthood, such as masses, prayers, vows, chastity, poverty, etc., not
only do not make one righteous, as they think, but also condemn him and
bring him to ruin, because they are ungodly things in and of themselves,
as the mass is, and also because an ungodly delusion is involved.

Not only does he condemn the idolaters and their works, but he also adds
this, that their witnesses are blind and see nothing; that is, that all
their doctrine is vain, uncertain and harmful, as Paul also says, \"They
understand not what they set\" \[1 Tim. 1:7\]. \"They see nothing\" is a
Hebrew idiom; \"see\" stands for preach, teach.

\(14\) Now he concludes, and says of all religions and deeds done
without faith in Christ, that they will finally come to shame. Therefore
it is a wretched thing to undertake so much labor and toil, to do so
many works, from which one has no other benefit than to be eternally put
to shame.

**V. 10. Who are they that make a god?**

\(15\) Hereby he mocks and scolds those who do not want to be formed by
God, that is, who do not want to be justified by grace, but make
themselves a god, that is, make themselves justified by their works and
deeds. Thus, every monk is one who makes a god, because he does not
invent God for himself according to words, but according to his
thoughts, that God is pleased with this rule, with this clothing, with
these vows 2c. Pleasure. Thus all saints of works make a god for
themselves, who is pleased with the works that they themselves do.

**V. 11 ff. Behold, all their comrades are put to shame.**

\(16\) All religions or righteousnesses other than the righteousness of
grace will be put to shame.

**Because they are masters made of people.**

This is an excellent conclusion, for it contains the reason for the
previous statement: \"For by the word \'master\' are designated the
saints of works, who toil with various works. But that he presents one
as a carpenter, the other as a blacksmith, he shows that the work of the
saints of works is different, since one wants to earn God\'s merit by
this work, the other by another; however, they all argue against this
doctrine of faith and grace.

18 But it is especially important to note in this passage that he adds,
\"Of men. For this contains the main principle of our doctrine, that
everything that is not prescribed in the word of God is reprehensible
and devilish, if we presume to propitiate God by it. Therefore, we are
not to do, teach, or believe anything except what is commanded by a very
specific word of God. But in things that do not concern the conscience,
and do not belong to the attainment of righteousness before God, we can
safely follow the teachings of men, as in housekeeping and worldly
government. For the wisdom to manage these things has been created for
us, and these things belong only to the

540 **L. xxiii, 43-45.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 44, 11-20.
**W.** vi, **8s\"-8k2.** 541

bodily life. But the consciences should and can be governed only by the
Word of GOD. That is why Isaiah condemns \"the masters who are of men\".

19 Furthermore, the extensive and long description of the \"masters\"
shows the misery of godless religion, the fruits of which are much toil,
weariness, fear and hardship, and finally, after the greatest labor,
become ashes. On the other hand, ours and the true religion, which
teaches trust in the mercy of Christ, satisfies our hearts in the
judgment of God and brings about joy in the Holy Spirit, so that we may
boast even of the tribulations that befall us elsewhere.

20 Thus the Prophet warns against other religions, which do nothing but
wear out body and soul at the same time in vain, and the more severe
they are, the more they make people fearful, distressed, and bring them
to despair. And just as the woman who suffered from the flow of blood
only got worse with her illness through the treatment of the physicians
\[Marc. 5, 26.\], so also through such actions the evil gets worse, and
the hearts are made more and more restless, as we experienced under the
pope, since the souls were not calmed down after innumerable pardons,
prayers, fasts, masses, and pilgrimages, but were tormented more
severely. But the word alone truly comforts, according to the saying:
\"If then we have been justified by faith, we have peace\" \[Rom. 5:1\].

**V. 17. Before it he kneels and falls down and prays.**

This seems foolish and ridiculous to us. But what does St. Jerome do
differently, since he commands to worship the wooden cross by falling on
his face (*(ψποδουλϊα)^1^ )?* What does a Franciscan do differently, who
imagines that he is damned if he does not gird a rope around his body,
if he does not have his head circumcised, if he does not put on a bad
garment? Is this not the utmost foolishness, then, to assume
righteousness from a girdle, from a plate, from a garment?

1\) Only in the Jena edition is the iota kupserixturu. Wittenberg and
Erlangen

do? Is this not the utmost ungodliness, worshipping these things? But
they deny that they worship these things. Yes, they worship them in
fact, because they believe that God looks at such futile things and
takes pleasure in them. But this is actually against the first
commandment, \"You shall not have other gods.\" For to believe that God
is reconciled by such works is to invent and make an idol for oneself
and to worship it. For the true God is the one of whom it is written,
\"Your eyes see by faith\" \[Jer. 5:3\].

**V. 18-20. They know nothing and understand nothing.**

\(22\) They do not know what the true worship is and cannot judge the
true worship. But they should think that just as the wood that is burned
is not God, nor does it make righteous, so the rest of the wood from
which the idol is made is not God. Thus a monk does not consider that,
just as the cloth on a chariot does not make righteous, so also the
cloth from which his robe is made does not make righteous; that, just as
the rope to which a horse is tied does not make righteous, so also the
rope with which he girds himself does not make righteous. But they
ascribe to their cowls and ropes the power to make righteous, because
they say that it is sinful for a Franciscan to walk without a cowl and
without a rope.

\(23\) For such scriptures must be applied to the idolatry of our
people. For in this whole passage the prophet has only to do with the
fact that everything that does not proceed from faith is idolatry,
whether it is done with iron or with wood. But the source of this
idolatry is that we think that God is reconciled through our works.

\(24\) Therefore, the true and only religion and worship is this, that
one believes forgiveness of sins, which God gives by grace and freely,
without works subsequent or antecedent, out of pure mercy; just as He
makes the sun shine, and gives all other good things that we have

542 L. xxm, 45-47. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 862-865. 543

enjoy. If one believes in this kind God, who does good by grace and for
free, this is true religion and true righteousness.

**V. 21. Remember this, Jacob and Israel.**

\(25\) He wants the memory of idolatry to remain with the descendants,
so that they may both thank God that they have been freed from such
great ungodliness by means of the Gospel, and learn to fear God, because
if He does not preserve us, we can easily fall into the same errors
again. Thus, we must by no means forget that which we have ungodly done
as well as believed in the pabstical. For what is more foolish, what is
more contrary to the honor of Christ, than to ascribe righteousness to a
dirty cap? And yet men have imagined this so stiffly and firmly that
they have put on the dead bodies of monks and buried them in them. There
have been countless other things of this kind, and it would be desirable
to make a register of them. For most of it is of such a nature that it
will hardly be believed by posterity. And yet we have been such fools
that we have cherished the delusion that righteousness and forgiveness
of sins are to be found in these things.

V. 22. **I will wipe away your iniquity like a cloud, and your sin like
the mist.**

\(26\) Hereby he briefly summarizes the main conclusion of this whole
text and repeats that no religion, no worship, no other God forgives and
redeems sins except Christ alone, and that free of charge and by grace.
Therefore, it is an apt description of Christ and Christ\'s ministry
that he is an everlasting high priest who reconciles us to GOD and blots
out our iniquity, who overcomes death and hell. This is a completely
different doctrine than the monks and sophists should understand. For
these make Christ a judge and executioner of consciences. Therefore so
many kinds of merits and works have been invented by which the enraged
judge could be reconciled. He adds:

**Turn to me, for I will deliver you.**

\(27\) As if to say: My office is to save; I have done this, I have
conquered sins, death, Satan, hell, on the cross, I have abolished the
rule of the law. Now you, too, do your duty: accept what I offer you,
turn to me, your Redeemer. Thus he dissuades from all other doctrines
and godless religions, which are contrary to this doctrine of grace. As
if he wanted to say: You will be drawn by different inclinations soon
there, soon there, that you turn away from me; therefore make an effort
that you turn to me. This conversion does not take place in one day or
in one month, as the Lent was under the papacy, but it is a perpetual
duty of the people of God.

\(28\) But it is ridiculous to try to force from such passages that
there is power in us to turn to God without His grace. For to those to
whom he communicates his word, he will also give power to believe the
word; for the word of God is not taught in vain and without fruit, but
the Holy Spirit is with the word, and moves hearts through the word so
that they believe. Then this \"turn to me,\" of which the prophet says
here, concerns not only faith, but also the teaching that we also
convert others who are turned away by ungodly teachings, that we exhort
them, that we comfort the despairing consciences 2c. For it takes much
effort to hold this article of justification against Satan, against
heresies, and against our reason.

V. 23 **Rejoice, O heavens, for the Lord has done it.**

After having finished the teaching of grace and the exhortation, he now
also gives thanks for this great gift. And this happens quite
appropriately in the final speeches. But what the Latin translation has
given: Misericordiam fecit Dominus, reads in Hebrew: \"For the Lord has
done it.\" For he looks back to what has gone before, as if to say: The

544 L. xxm. **47\^50.** brief interpretation On Isaiah, cap. 44, 23-28.
**W. VI. 86S-869.** 545

The Lord alone is the creator and the one who does it. What the Lord
says, that happens; he promises righteousness in the word free of charge
and by grace, and he also offers and gives it. But the idols and their
teachers are vain talkers. When they speak or promise something, it does
not come to pass, as he said above \[vv. 9, 11\]: Their end is that they
become ashamed.

\(30\) This is a well-known Hebrew expression: \"Rejoice, you heavens,\"
that is, you who are of heaven or under heaven, as when I said,
\"Rejoice, you Elbe, to the Lord, for the gift of the spreading of the
Word;\" that is, you Wittenberg, or those who dwell on the Elbe.

**V. 24. Thus says the Lord your Redeemer.**

After the discussion about faith in Christ and the doctrine of faith is
finished, he makes his way to the people who were in Babylonian
captivity and were to be redeemed by Cyrus. As if he wanted to say: Keep
my words that I say. So it will happen that you will be redeemed by my
power, against all presumption, as much as others ridicule me as a weak
God.

**He who prepared you from the womb.**

\(32\) Here we see what free will does. But this is the custom of the
holy scripture, that it ascribes everything to God, that everything we
receive is given to us from our mother\'s womb, so that we may not be
proud.

**I am the Lord who does everything.**

\(33\) Hereby he looks upon the idols. For he refutes all opposing
religions, that we should say: The God of the Turks, of the Jews, of the
Papists does nothing; but our God does everything. For this is what he
wants when he says, \"I am he,\" and no one with me, so that he may
prove that he is the one, and so that he may draw us away from idolatry,
that we may remain in the truth of faith.

**V. 25. Who nullifies the signs of the soothsayers.**

He calls the teachers of other religions, who do not teach the
righteousness of faith, but the works, \"soothsayers\". He shows that
the teaching of these is both false and foolish. That the religion of
the papists is such today, we learn.

**V. 26. But confirm the word of his servant.**

35 As he said in the beginning \[Cap. 40, 8\], so he also concludes:
\"The word of the Lord endures forever. He calls the word of the gospel
\"counsel,\" by which the conscience is advised, as he also calls Christ
a counsel in the ninth chapter above, v. 6.

**He who says to Jerusalem: Be inhabited!**

Here he comes to Cyrus, and speaks of the thing as a past, which was
nevertheless still future. But he holds up this prophecy of Cyrus to
comfort the godly so that they will not despair of the future kingdom of
Christ, which he has described in these four chapters. For since the
Jews were to be almost completely destroyed by the Babylonians, all the
promises of Christ\'s kingdom were in danger; and since the kingdom and
the priesthood of the Jews, together with the temple and the city of
Jerusalem, had been destroyed by the Babylonians, there could be no hope
of Christ\'s kingdom. Therefore, he promised to bring back the people
through Cyrus and to restore the kingdom with the priesthood, so that
the promised kingdom of Christ would be given to the unharmed people.

**V. 27. Who says to the deep: Seal!**

37 He praises his power in a general statement. However, it can be taken
as a figurative speech of the king of Babel. Just as I dried up the Red
Sea, so I can also dry up the great rivers, the Tigris and Euphrates,
with their princes.

**V. 28. and shall accomplish all my will 2c.**

38\. Cyrus will bring back my people and will make Jerusalem inhabited
again.

546 xxiii, so-52. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, \[ss-872. 547

**The Forty-Fifth Chapter.**

Here the prophet starts to talk about the restoration of the Jews by
Cyrus. Furthermore, it is to be noted as something special and strange
that he calls Cyrus an anointed one of God. For Messiah is a general
name, and means a king, because the kings were anointed. But that he
adds, \"my anointed one\", one does not read of any heathen king.
Therefore, I would like to believe that Cyrus was holy, and that the
return of the people and the restoration of the kingdom and the
priesthood were fruits of faith.

**V. 1. That I might subdue the Gentiles before him.**

2\. the victories are also given to the Gentiles from heaven, and the
kingdoms are both established and destroyed by God, as this passage
shows. Many similar sayings can be drawn from Daniel here. \"Belt\"
means the administration of the kingdom.

**V. 2. 3. that you may know that I am the Lord 2c.**

\(3\) All these things, saith he, will I give thee, that thou mayest
know me. For what he has said up to now, he said of Cyrus, when he was
not yet a believer. But it can also be taken like this: \"Who I have
called you by your name\", that is, who I have chosen you especially
before others. It was an important and most admirable thing that he
could believe in the God of Israel, who had been overcome by the king of
Babylon, whom Cyrus himself had overcome.

**V. 4. For the sake of Jacob, my servant.**

4 This passage is well to remember that the kingdoms are aligned and
destroyed for the sake of the godly.

**V. 5. I equipped you, since you did not yet know me.**

5\. instead of: Assimilavi te, et non cognovisti me translate thus: I
have called you by name

You did not know me yet. These are great praises that the God of the
Jews, who overcame the Babylonians, gave all these glorious victories to
Cyrus. In order that he might strengthen him against this affliction of
weakness, he adds:

**I am the Lord, and no one else.**

\(6\) Though the Babylonians have triumphed against me, yet I alone am
the true God, and there is no other God besides me.

**V. 6, 7: I who make light and create darkness.**

7 I take \"light\" and \"darkness\" as figurative. Speech for happiness
and unhappiness. As if he wanted to say: If you desire peace and
salvation, seek it from me. If you are afraid of misfortune, then fear
me. For I create both. This boasting of the divine power is necessary
against the annoyance of weakness. For at that time the Jews regarded
God as a blasphemed idol among the Gentiles, who had not saved his
people from captivity and had not protected them from the violence that
a godless king had done to the people of God. And this trouble also
disturbed the godly. Therefore, he now begins an exhortation.

**V. 8. drip, you heavens, from above, and the clouds 2c.**

This passage is much used in the church of the papists, and is a strong
proof of their ignorance, because they have drawn it to the holy virgin.
We know, however, that in this chapter the promised redemption through
Cyrus is dealt with. This passage is spoken in imitation. For it is
spoken in the person of those who were in captivity, and contains the
inexpressible groaning of the blessed, who realized that they were
oppressed with such great misfortune because of their sins. As if they
wanted to say: Behold, we are of the priesthood and of the kingdom, the

[548 L. xxin, S2-S4. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 45, 8-10. W.
vi, 872-875. 549]{.underline}

We have been deprived of the temple and all worship; we have been
transferred to the Gentiles. There our sins answer us; these press us so
hard that there is no hope of salvation anywhere. For there is nowhere a
righteous man who could satisfy so great a wrath of God. The whole
nation is so overwhelmed with sins that there is no hope of salvation.
Therefore, O heavens, drip and rain righteousness; if it is not poured
out upon us from above, it is done for us. Ah! that God would now grant
us forgiveness of sins and give us the Holy Spirit to shower us with
grace: then it would happen, when first our sins were taken away and God
was reconciled again, that we would be brought back. For there is no
hope that the punishment will cease as long as the accusation and the
guilt remain. Therefore, rend the heavens and come down; sprinkle us
with your righteousness, and we will soon be restored. 2c.

\(9\) This is an excellent passage that teaches us about all
temptations. For in every distress and punishment we are terrified by
our sins and the wrath of God. Hence follow such sighs as the prophet
describes here.

But the prophet makes several steps; for \"the dew of heaven\" is the
divine grace with which God embraces and caresses His own. This is
immediately followed by \"the rain from the clouds\". For the first gift
and the first work of divine grace is that it gives pious teachers who
teach the word purely and loudly. When this happens, \"the earth opens
up,\" that is, the word is given a happy progress, so that there are
many disciples. Then \"salvation springs up,\" that is, the consciences
are freed, even the bodily plagues are taken away, and \"at the same
time righteousness springs up,\" that is, fruits worthy of this
preaching follow.

**I, the Lord, create it.**

\(11\) The groaning and prayer of the captive people is answered. You
ask for righteousness and salvation; behold, I, the LORD, create the
same, and give it to you; fall

Only do not depart from faith; hope, and I will deliver you. This is the
real and true opinion, which agrees in everything with the preceding and
the following. Therefore, the papists who read this in their churches as
if it were said by the Blessed Virgin Mary are acting inconsistently.

**V. 9. io. Woe to him who disputes with his Creator.**

\(12\) So far he has dealt with the attitude of the godly; now he deals
with the other party, that is, the person of the wicked, who are annoyed
by the deeds of God, because they see that they are afflicted, even
though they have the name of the people of God, and that, on the other
hand, the Babylonians, the wicked pagans, are prospering, and everything
is going very well for them. Therefore, they begin to quarrel with God
as to why He is doing this. But it is the most dangerous and greatest
challenge of all to dispute with God why He does this or that, because
the works of God are incomprehensible. And one has not been able to find
a reason why God has rejected the entire people, along with the worship
and the kingdom, and handed them over into the hands of a godless king.
But this thought is magnified by the fact that they see that the whole
world adheres to another religion and has an abundance of all goods.

\(13\) Therefore, weak hearts think this way: Do you think that God has
rejected so many peoples and chosen us, who are the smallest part,
especially since the fact shows the opposite, and the whole world
considers us to be such people, whom our God has abandoned and rejected?
If we now consider this, not only according to the matter (objective),
but also according to the movements of the heart (affective), that is,
when Satan inflames our hearts with his attitude (habitu), namely with
anger and hatred against God, it happens that the overcome hearts
worship the devil for God, and flee from God, as from the devil, and ape
him. This is the origin of such speeches \[Jer. 20:15\]: \"Cursed be he
who brought good tidings to my father, saying, \'You have a young
son\'\"; likewise \[Jer. 20:14\]: \"Cursed be that day,

550 L. xxni, 54-S7. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 875-879. 551

wherein I was born.\" Likewise \[Jer. 20:7\], \"O Lord, thou hast
persuaded me, and I have been persuaded.\" For so far do the hearts go
astray by these thoughts, when they dispute about the deeds of God, why
he does this or that. That is why I have said that one must be on the
highest guard against this.

14\. But there is no other way to wriggle out of it than to turn away
one\'s eyes and senses from it absolutely, and not to allow this
question at all. For it cannot be comprehended, and those who want to
comprehend it plunge into hell and sink therein, denying God and all His
works. Therefore, the prophet reminds his people not to be angry with
God\'s deeds. Do not quarrel, he says, with your Creator. Do not ask why
I visit you like this. Be patient about the present and do not worry
about the future. For I am your Creator, who do and govern all things
according to my will 2c.

**V. 11. Demand from me the signs.**

15 There is an emphasis in the pronoun \"me. For these words are spoken
for the future comfort of those who were to be led to Babylon, that he
might precede them with promises, that they might be assured that God
would take care of them. As if he wanted to say: Incline your ears to my
word and judge according to my word. For in the tribulation we are not
to follow our thoughts and senses, but the word and the promises.
Therefore he says: Ask me for advice and comfort, do not take refuge in
your ungodly suggestions 2c. Turn to me and ask my word for counsel, and
you will be comforted and know that this captivity will not last forever
2c.

**V. 12. I have made the earth.**

\(16\) Commit your cause to me. For I can help you; you are the work of
my hands and my children. I am your Creator, therefore I will preserve
you; only do not despair. All this is said for the comfort of those who
should feel the Babylonian captivity.

**V. 13. I have raised him up in righteousness.**

17 He speaks of a yet future thing as if it were present. But he means
Cyrus. I have raised him up in righteousness, that is, I have sent him
to restore the kingdom and the priesthood and to give the captive people
a just government.

**V. 14: The Egyptian trade and the Moorish trade.**

18 He promises Cyrus dominion over other nations as well, as a reward
for his efforts in returning the Jews. \"He calls their wealth \"the
trade of the Egyptians.

**They will fall down before you, and plead with you.**

19\. adorare means a gesture, not a service, like those who bow their
knees before princes, which is a very praiseworthy and common custom.
Thus deprecari means to become a supplicant. But what the Latin
translation has given: Viros sublimes, according to the Hebrew, is \"the
long people\" (viri mensurae); not according to size, but because they
are rich, wealthy and powerful.

**V. 15. Truly, you are a hidden God.**

20: These are the words of the prophet who, according to this prophecy,
is amazed and astonished that God rules, guides and saves His own in a
miraculous way.

**V. 16. 17. But the idolaters must all stand with shame and scorn.**

21 He comforts through a contrast. O Israel! You have the true God, who
is mighty in word and deed. All other gods, all worshippers of other
gods will be put to shame. But these are words of faith; before the
world the opposite is true. Therefore he calls the God of Israel a
hidden God.

**V. 18. The God who prepared the earth.**

22 Here he gives credibility to the promises and strengthens the hearts
of the believers so that they should not doubt the future redemption. As
if he wanted to say: Believe only me-

**552 v-** xxiii, **57-59.** brief interpretation on Isa. cap. 45,
18-22. **w. vr, 879-882. 553**

n my words and promises, for I will redeem you and can redeem you. I did
not create the earth to be desolate, but to be inhabited. And my word is
powerful, it will not deceive you, but will give that which is promised.

23 Furthermore, by \"earth\" I do not mean the whole world, but Judea,
which was desolate after the people were taken to Babylon. For what need
is there to promise such a thing of a land that is already inhabited?
Therefore he understands the desolate land of the Jews.

**I am the Lord, and am no more.**

24\. He boasts of his power, so that the power of the Babylonians will
be small in the eyes of the captives. I am God; no one, no matter how
powerful he may be, shall resist me and not prevent what I promise from
coming to pass.

**V. 19. I have not spoken in secret.**

\(25\) Everything goes to the confirmation of the previous promises of
Cyrus, and to the uprightness of the hearts of the captives. My
promises, saith he, shall stand fast; for I speak not into the wind, I
speak not into secret, or into the wilderness, where no man heareth; but
unto them that shall believe these promises, in whom my word shall be
strong. And it shall surely come to pass what I have now promised of the
redemption to come, which shall be through Cyrus.

**For I am the LORD who speaks of righteousness.**

I speak of righteousness. But God\'s \"speak\" is to do, as in the first
book of Moses \[Cap. 1, 3\]: \"God spoke; and it was so.\" Therefore He
now says: \"These promises of Mine will bring about a righteous
government for you, that the kingdom and the priesthood may be restored,
and the remission of sins and punishments may be preached.

**V. 20. Let the heroes of the Gentiles gather and come together.**

27\. he scoffs at the Babylonians, but especially at those who have the
oversight of the god.

The first service was in the morning. As if he wanted to say: I have
proclaimed and promised this before; proclaim something like this. What
the Latin translation has given: Qui salvati estis ex gentibus, that
must be read active: Salvatores gentium, ye saviors of the Gentiles, so
that it may be spoken mockingly: ye who measure yourselves, who boast
that ye can save men, counsel and help them 2c. But this also is a
comfort to the godly.

**Who know nothing, and carry themselves with the blocks of their
idols.**

Your doctrine is nothing, your religion, your worship, your
righteousness are nothing. Note the epithet that he calls them
\"carriers\" \[\"who carry themselves with the blocks of their
idols\"\]. As if he wanted to say: Your gods are such gods that you must
carry, feed and maintain them yourselves; otherwise they would lie. Thus
the rule of Franciscus, of the Carthusian Order 2c. is an idol which
they must carry; by itself it could not stand, and if they did not carry
it, it would fall. For such scriptural passages must be taken generally
of all idolatries. This also is to be noted, that he calls their god
such a god, who cannot help.

**V. 21: Who has been saying this since ancient times?**

29 This, namely this prophecy of Cyrus.

**A righteous God and Savior.**

30 He opposes this to the idols. \"A righteous GOtt,\" because he brings
righteousness. \"A Savior,\" because he makes blessed, gives forgiveness
of sins and grace, by which we are to be justified, and when we have
been justified, redeemed from all evil, and so become blessed. No other
God, no other religion, no worship and no work can do this.

**V. 22. Turn to me, and you will be saved.**

31 He concludes this matter with an exhortation. Because I have foretold
these things, let me not speak in vain. Turn your ears and your hearts
to me; believe me, I who make these promises to you, and all these
things will come to pass.

554 L. xxm, 59-\"i. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 882-885. 555

32 Furthermore, this \"turning to the Lord\" happens through faith. For
the word of promise requires faith. But it indicates that the hearts are
turned away because they are attached to the power of the Chaldeans and
to their misery. Therefore, salvation seems to be impossible. Therefore,
he wants them to turn their eyes away from the present state of things
and look only at the word.

We have already reminded you of this many times, that in the time of
challenge all outward appearances must be put out of one\'s mind, and
one must follow the Word alone, without looking at the difference that
exists between the Word and the present circumstances.

V. 23. **I swear by myself, and a word of righteousness goes out of my
mouth 2c.**

34 This saying of the prophet is general. For according to the promise
he exhorts them to turn to him, and comes to speak secretly of Cyrus to
Christ. I,\" he says, \"will one day send a word that all idols and all
false worship will be destroyed, all swearing will be abolished, and
only I will be sworn by. Such sudden transitions are frequent in the
prophets. \"The word of righteousness\" is the gospel that brings
righteousness and forgiveness of sins. This is a Hebrew way of speaking,
that they use the word \"swear\" for preach. For they used to confirm
their sermons with oaths.

V.24. **And say, In the Lord I have righteousness and strength.**

35 This is the form of the oath. \[Instead of: Ergo in Domino dicet:
Meae sunt justitiae et imperium\] the text must be connected in this
way: \"Let all tongues swear and say: In the Lord I have righteousness
and strength\" 2c. Thus faith in Christ is our righteousness, not in our
works, not in our worship, not in our deeds, but in the Lord, who is our
strength, that whoever will boast may boast in the Lord \[Jer. 9:24, 1
Cor. 1:31\]. Such will also come to him.

36\. instead of: Ad eum venient, 1) one has to

read: \"Those who are such will come to him\". Those who are not such,
even if they boast that they are the synagogue or the church, will not
come to him because they are foreign children.

**But all those who resist him must become ashamed.**

37\) So where the gospel is, there must also be enemies of the gospel,
as Ps. 110, 1. 2. says: \"I will make your enemies your footstool\";
\"rule in the midst of your enemies\"; 2) and Luc. 2, 34: \"Christ will
be a sign that is contradicted. However, the end of the adversaries will
be this, that they must be put to shame. This is an excellent passage.
Therefore this appendix is as it were a secret interpretation
(allegoria) of the history. Cyrus is Christ. Babylon is the world. But
Jerusalem is the church.

Cap. 46, 1. 2 **The Bei is bowed.**

. 38 We also want to connect these words with this chapter. For the
prophet, according to his custom, adds another song, and as it were a
song of triumph, with which he mocks the Babylonians. He begins with the
destruction of religion, which was followed by the destruction of the
worldly regime. No doubt the Babylonians laughed at this passage,
because he boasts that the idols had fallen, whose worship was
increasing at that time.

**Their idols have been given to animals and cattle. 3)**

\(39\) Among the other spoils which Cyrus brought into Persia were
golden idols. But the prophet plays with these words as if he wanted to
say: These idols were once a burden for men; now they also press and
weigh down the animals, which do not carry them to Persia without the
greatest burden.

1\) Instead of vsnist in the editions, the Vulgate reads verneut.

2\) In Latin, this passage from the 110th Psalm (probably because the
pen could not follow the lecture) is quoted very arbitrarily: I\" meäio
inirnieorum Quorum povain seaßsllnm peäuni tuornm, in the midst of your
enemies I will set the footstool of your feet.

3\) Instead of lraeta in the editions, the Vulgate reads taota.

**556** SI-S3. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 46, 1-5. W. VI,
886-889. **557**

**The Forty-Sixth Chapter.**

The prophet still remains with the promises and consolations that God
will snatch his own out of the Babylonian captivity by Cyrus. But he
speaks primarily to those who let themselves be overcome by the
tribulations, so that they despaired of being led back, and now looked
for other help and for other gods. For this is what people do who become
fainthearted in adversity; they doubt that God will take care of them.
Therefore, they fall away to other gods and seek other help. The prophet
strengthens them and wants to persuade them that they should certainly
believe that God cares for them and that they will only suffer for a
time.

\(2\) Now this passage contains a very glorious promise, in which mercy
is poured out altogether; but we are not worthy to read it, because of
our unbelief. For this is the way the flesh is wont to do: when it is
oppressed by a calamity, it feels that God is angry, and imagines all
the terrifying examples of divine judgment, when one should rather do
the opposite, and lift up the desolate heart with such promises as these
are. For these two duties are thus distinguished from one another, that
the rocks, that is, the hard and secure hearts, should be crushed, but
the smoldering wick should not be quenched.

**V. 3. You who are carried by me in the body.**

This is an exceedingly sweet image, that he says that they are carried
by him in the womb, and that he is the mother who carries them as a
tender child in the womb. First of all, God praises His attitude towards
the troublesome; He is not a tyrant, not a tormentor (although it may
seem that way), but a mother who takes great care that she does not harm
the child she carries in her mother.

4 Secondly, it reminds us what we are and how we should be, namely a
child,

The child that is enclosed in the mother, which sees nothing, feels
nothing, cares for nothing, but all care falls to the mother; and
although the container is narrow, it is still soft and well kept. Thus,
by this similitude, he reminds us that when we are in trouble, we should
let go of our cares, lest we be turned away to another God by the
sensation of present ills.

Furthermore, the womb of God is the word of divine promise in which we
are carried and formed. Thus Paul says that he begat the Galatians and
Corinthians through the word of the gospel \[1 Cor. 4:15, Gal. 4:19\].
Therefore, we should not fear that God will corrupt us, since He carries
us in the mother. And although the child in the womb is very tender and
weak, it does not perish in the womb. But this is our duty, that we take
care that we do not fall out of this mother through our fault. For if we
remain true to the word, Christ suffers with us, just as a mother
suffers at the same time when she gives birth to a child.

**V. 4. Yes, I will carry you to old age and until you turn gray.**

\(6\) First, I will carry you in the mother until you are formed. Then,
when you are born and formed, I will also carry you forever, until you
grow. So a mother carries the fruit in the womb, the infant in the womb,
the child on her back. Thus we who are in grace are carried forever. But
these are words of faith. Looking at the matter and the outward
appearance, we seem to be rejected.

**V. 5. To whom then do you compare me?**

7 He speaks of the Jews who were in Babylon, who, as I said in the
beginning \[§ 1\], prompted by their misfortune, turned away from God
and sought foreign counsel and advice.

558 L. xxiii, 63-6p. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 889-8S3.
559

sought help. For the heart naturally looks for help in danger, and
adversity forms a god. Therefore, in childbirth, shipwreck, and other
perils, so many works have been done, so many ungodly vows have been
made. Therefore he reminds them: Why then do you form me other than I
am? Do not look at idols. Return to me, your God, who will and can save
you; idols cannot do this.

**V. 6. 7. They lift him up on their shoulders and carry him.**

\(8\) It is a foolish and weak god that you make up for yourselves. He
does not carry you, as I do, but he is carried by you. So he mocks them
and reproaches their unbelief.

**V. 8. Remember these things, and be firm.**

9 For this is how one must read, not: Confundamini. He addresses the
unbelieving spirits and those who sought to make themselves blessed by
their actions. What do you seek by your actions? he says. Why do you
expect and ask help from other gods? I have promised salvation so long
ago; therefore all your doings are in vain, and my promise alone will
redeem you, not the idols you worship. Thus he will draw the unbelievers
away from their doings and bring them back to the word and to his
promise. Corroboremini, that is, be firm, so that you will not be swayed
and swayed by all kinds of winds of false teaching.

**V. 9: Remember the former things of old.**

\(10\) I do not think he is talking about the miracles in Egypt, but
about the promises that actually belonged to the captivity. As if he
wanted to say: So long before I promise the redemption; if this will now
take place, it will take place because of my promise, not because of
your works.

**V. 10: My plan stands, and I do everything that pleases me.**

\(11\) The opinion of this must be explained by the contradiction, that
our suggestions and our will do not exist nor will they come to pass, so
that he may thus remove all certainty from us and attach it to his word,
without which no one can be certain of the divine will, without which
nothing is valid, certain or certain that is taught of God and of
righteousness before God.

12 Furthermore, this certainty and joyfulness of heart is necessary for
us. For each one should be certain of his office and position, that he
pleases God; not for the sake of the person, who never does his office
justice, but because we know that it is a work of obedience, wrapped in
God\'s word, which commands that each one should wait for his calling.
But here we learn that Satan uses a wonderful trick, which makes it so
that we do not like both those works that the Word approves and of which
we could be certain, and those that we invent ourselves and of which we
cannot be certain, because they do not have the Word.

V. 11. f. **I call to a bird from the exit.**

He calls Cyrus \"a bird\" because of his speed. Thus he calls him \"a
man of his will\" who carries out his counsel, namely that of God, so
that it may become clear that the attempts of men are futile, but those
of God are certain.

**What I say, I let come, and what I think, I do.**

The divine majesty uses such abundance of speech against the ingrained
and hardened evil that is innate in us, that we try to help ourselves by
our actions.

**560** L- xxm, 66-68. brief interpretation on Isa. cap. 47, 1-7. w. vi.
893-896. **561**

**The Forty-Seventh Chapter.**

The prophet has had enough arguments with his idolatrous Jews, who
sought salvation through their actions and despised the promises. Now he
turns to the Babylonians and threatens them with destruction. But
everything is aimed at comforting the captive people, whom he tries to
lead back to God, who had made the promises. As if he wanted to say: You
do not believe my promises because the power of the Babylonians seems to
be insurmountable to you. Well, however insurmountable they may be, I
will overthrow and destroy them.

**Cap. 46, 12. Listen to me, you of proud heart.**

Here we begin the 47th chapter. \[Instead of: Audite me, duri corde\]
one can translate more appropriately so: \"Listen to me, you of proud
heart\", you who are proud against me, and consider me a weak God,
because I suffered it that my people was taken captive by you. For he
speaks mainly of presumption on religion, and on idols. Therefore he
adds, \"Ye that are far from righteousness.\" For Daniel also ascribes a
golden head to this monarchy, and Abraham had lived in this very
religion of the Chaldeans. Therefore the Chaldeans boasted particularly
of the religion.

Cap. 46, 13. **I have brought my justice near.**

In a little while Cyrus will be here; through him I will give salvation
to the people and restore righteousness; 1) I will restore the
priesthood, the kingdom, and all worship. Others prefer to understand
this passage of Christ as passing from the fleshly kingdom to the
spiritual kingdom, and to understand by righteousness that which we
obtain through Christ.

1\) Wittenberger: röstitutarn instead of: röstituam.

**Cap. 47, 1. Down, virgin, daughter of Babylon, sit down in the dust.**

4\. this is a poetic image through which he indicates the desolation of
the Babylonian monarchy. You are on top of the world, descend, you will
be brought into captivity 2c.

**V. 2. Take the mill and grind flour.**

By this picture the extreme servitude is indicated. But this whole
passage threatens the Babylonians the complete irretrievable ruin.
Instead of: Denuda turpitudinem etc. translate: \"Unbraid your braids,
uncover your foot, uncover your thigh\", that is, you will lose the
worldly regiment, and all your glory. This is also the meaning of the
following words \[vv. 3-5\].

\(6\) For the prophet has comforted his own with clear and many words,
that all power, happiness and dominion should be snatched from the
Babylonians who held them captive.

**V. 6 For I was angry with my people.**

7\. instead of: Iratus sum must be read in the past tense: \"I have been
angry\", or \"since I was angry\" 2c. For the prophet here indicates the
sin of the Babylonians by which they deserved such great punishments. My
will was, saith he, that ye should be a chastening of my people, but not
that ye should utterly destroy the same which ye have in mind.

**V. 7. nor thought of how it would be with them hereafter.**

8 Instead of novissimi tui translate: Novissima ejus, \"as it should
become with them\", namely with my people, \"afterwards\"; that is, you
did not think that they should be redeemed, as I promised. But this
example should remind you that you did not go along so surely. For since
I have not spared my people in their transgression, how will it be with
you? But thou art sure, and takest not this to heart.

562 L. xxm, 68-7\". Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 896-soo. 563

**V. 8. I will not become a widow.**

These are figurative words. That is, I will always have princes, always
have peoples who are subservient to me.

**V. 9. For the sake of the multitude of your magicians.**

10 Thus he calls the teachers, who had the supervision of religion and
worship, likewise, the heads of the commonwealth, that is, the most holy
and most wise in this kingdom.

**V. 10. For you have relied on your wickedness.**

11\. you are sure you think your sin is not sin.

**Your wisdom and art have overthrown you.**

\(12\) This is an excellent passage, that the commonwealths are
destroyed only by the wisest, who believe that they give the best
advice. We have many examples of this everywhere in the histories.
Demosthenes, Cicero, Caesar, Pompey are well known. Thus religion is
destroyed by the holiest, as the examples of the monks and the whole
papacy teach us. The cause of this is that both those who are famous for
their wisdom and those who are famous for their holiness before men live
without fear of God and fall into presumption. When this happens, it is
lost.

13\. but this is what the prophets remind us, not that we should despise
the laws and good customs in which human wisdom and righteousness stand,
but that we should be humbled and not be puffed up over the gifts of
God. For God can suffer nothing less than presumption.

heit. That is why he destroyed the synagogue, his people, the holy city
Jerusalem, and the temple with all its services, which he himself had
established.

**V. 11. For a sudden tumult will come upon you.**

\(14\) This is the end of all the wicked, that they perish suddenly,
that is, when they do nothing less. For they go along securely in their
schemes, promising themselves all good things, until in the midst of
their schemes they are oppressed and perish.

**V. 12. f. So now stand up with your summoners.**

15 He mocks the Babylonians, who were presumptuous of their wisdom. See
what you can do, try your strength, whether you can drive back the evil
hovering over you. This passage must be remembered against the
astrologers.

**V.14. For there will not be one ember to warm oneself.**

16\. Hereby he indicates a sudden devastation. The fire will not last
long, but in a moment your kingdom will be turned back by me, the
foolish God.

**V. 15. So they are among whom you have labored.**

Neither your wise men, nor your godly men (religiosi), who by their
wisdom and religion work on you, will be able to help you, but will
themselves perish. But all this is written for the comfort of the Jews,
that they may the more easily believe the glorious promises of the
future redemption through Cyrus, which seemed impossible in view of the
great power of the Babylonians.

**The forty-eighth chapter.**

1 This is as it were the conclusion of the promise of salvation. For he
warns his own to beware of other prophecies, though they boast of great
things, and by abominable curses and oaths, to beware of the things of
which they speak.

try to make their words credible. Even if they swear by the name of the
Lord,\" he says, \"do not believe them. For by these magnificent oaths
they want to deceive you.

564 K- xxm, 70-72. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 48, 1-7. W. vi,
so\"-so4. 565

\(2\) For this is the characteristic of false prophets, that they swear
sacrilegiously, and curse themselves, that they may the more easily
deceive the simple. We have also in our time heard such sacrilegious
spirits, who have appealed to the judgment seat of Christ against us,
because we wanted the dignity of the sacraments to be preserved. Because
they know that the godly are moved by the name of God, they try to make
themselves popular with the people through these arts. But the outcome
will make it more and more clear from day to day how true they have
sworn. Against such teachers the prophet also struggles here and wants
his people to cling to the promise of God.

**V. 1: You who are called by the name of Israel.**

\(3\) He bluntly insults their unbelief. As if he wanted to say: You are
called by name Israel, but it would be desirable if you were Israel in
fact and in truth, such a people who clung to the promise that was made
to Israel.

**V. 2. For they call themselves from the holy city.**

He attacks their presumption in saying: We are God\'s people, we are
from the holy city, therefore God can no longer make it bad for us, just
as today the papists say: We are followers of Christ and the apostles,
therefore we cannot err. We are the Church, therefore we cannot be
abandoned by God. But in the first chapter of John \[v. 13\] it is
written: \"Who are born not of the will of man, but of God\" 2c. And yet
this single ground of proof has always been the most prominent in the
world, and has hardly been able to be resolved among the Jewish people.
That is why Paul takes a lot of trouble about it in the epistle to the
Romans \[Cap. 9. 10. 11\].

**V. 3. I have proclaimed this future before.**

5 He gives the reason why he is so long ahead of them with promises. For
your sake, he says, I am doing it, you who have the

You are false Israel, so that you will be disgraced when it happens, and
that you will see that you have not been helped by your deeds and plots,
but by my promises. \"The things to come\" he calls the promises of
Cyrus, of whom he promises that he will be the redeemer of his people so
long after.

V. 4. 5. **For I know that you are hard.**

6 This passage must be applied in general to all saints of works who
strive to accomplish something through their actions and trust in their
works. ^r^) I, saith he, am compelled, because of this hardness and iron
face of thine, to say beforehand that these things shall come to pass,
lest, when they come to pass afterward, thou impute them to thy idols,
and to thy righteousness.

\(7\) Thus we promised forgiveness of sins before we were born. Why then
are we so foolish as to ascribe it to our works and our idols? But there
is \"a vein of iron, and a forehead of brass\"; therefore even the
papists cannot be changed; and our heretics stubbornly resist the truth,
and do not even repent, though they are warned by the terrible examples
of theirs.

**V. 6, 7: All these things you hear and see.**

8\. instead of: Quae audisti, vide omnia translate: \"All these things
you hear, and see, and yet have not proclaimed.\" But all this is to
shame the false teachers, that he may bring the people again to his word
from the vain being of idolatry. \"I will cause new things to be told
thee before,\" and promise thee such things as thou hast never thought
of. These things are also hidden at the time when I speak them; but they
come nevertheless in their time. But you cannot know them even one day
before they happen.

r\) Instead of the following in? 6 and s 7, the 1532 edition has: Here
you see why the papists cannot be changed. Here you see why our heretics
stubbornly resist the truth and do not even repent, although they are
warned by so many frightening examples of theirs. For they have a vein
of iron in their neck, and a forehead of brass.

566 L- xxiii, 72-75. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 994-907.
567

**V. 8. and from his mother\'s womb he was called a transgressor.**

\(9\) \"You are called a transgressor from your mother\'s womb,\" you
deserve to be called a transgressor. For \"from the womb\" is as much as
always. These are epithets, and actually passions of all the ungodly,
but especially of false teachers and heretics, that they are not moved,
that they are not ashamed; they have not a fleshy brow, but they are
despisers and sure.

**V. 9. Therefore I am patient for my name\'s sake.**

10\. instead of: Propter nomen meum longe faciam etc. translate: \"For
my name\'s sake I am patient, and for my glory\'s sake I will abstain
from thee (that is, for thy sake or benefit), that thou be not cut
off.\" This is an apt saying against the merits of works. \"For my
name\'s sake,\" not, for thy name\'s sake, because thou art called of
the holy city, or of Franciscus, or Augustine, or Bernardus 2c. Thus he
takes away with one word all the righteousnesses and religions of the
world.

**V. 10. Behold, I will purify you, but not like silver.**

\(11\) This is a good comfort in the cross. For he promises to keep
himself, and to abstain from utterly destroying his people. What then is
the manner? How does God preserve His own so that they do not perish?
Namely, in this way, that He purifies them in the furnace of fire, that
is, that He strikes and lays out the cross for us. Consequently,
tribulation is not a sign of divine wrath, but of divine grace;
consequently, tribulation is not condemnation, but blessedness. And when
God strikes, He strikes so that we may be preserved and not condemned
with this world \[1 Cor. 11:32\].

12\. that he adds, \"Not like silver\"; this is done so that one should
not understand a bodily cleansing, as he calls the spiritual hunger \"a
hunger, but not a hunger for bread\" in Amos \[Cap. 8, 11\].

13\) The same is true of the following words: \"I will choose you in the
furnace of misery. But we feel the opposite when we are dried in this
furnace. For it seems to us as if we are more defiled than cleansed.
Therefore, these sayings must be diligently impressed upon the
afflicted, that they may be uplifted and learn that the life of grace is
good for nothing unless it is in the furnace of misery, which does not
take away grace, but rather brings grace with it. Thus the word of
temptations and the cross teaches us; the flesh and the senses teach the
opposite.

**V. 11. For my sake, yes, for my sake I will do it, so that I will not
be blasphemed.**

\(14\) Behold, this he calls blasphemy, when we undertake to propitiate
God with our works. For this is why he promises salvation, lest the
wicked imagine that they owe it to their works, which is the highest
blasphemy. Others prefer to draw it on the Babylonians: I will save you,
so that the Babylonians will not continue to blaspheme me,^s^ ) as Moses
also says in his song: \"But because of the anger of the enemies I have
delayed it, so that their enemies would not be proud,\" Deut. 32, 27.

**For I will not leave my honor to another.**

\(15\) When I do something, I do it for my own sake, not for the sake of
your works. For that would be to ascribe deity to works. Therefore, all
saints of works strive for divinity. But for this reason so many
examples of divine grace are presented to us in the Scriptures, that
just as we should not despair because of sin, so we should not be
presumptuous for the sake of our works and righteousness.

Therefore, this sermon is for Christians, who should mortify their
bodies before men, but know before God that they will not be condemned
because of their sins, nor saved because of their good deeds, so that
the glory may be God\'s alone, and not ours.

s\) Instead of the following in this paragraph, the 1532 edition has:
Both views are suitable and good.

568 xxiii, 75-77. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 48, 12-16. W. vi,
so7-sio. 569

**V. 12. Listen to me, Jacob, and you Israel, my called one.**

I am the first, and also the last; I have always been, and will be
forever. I promise you what is to come before it comes to pass, and that
by grace, in vain. Therefore, you will be saved because of my promise,
not because of your actions and works. This is how he wants us to cling
to the word and grace alone.

18 But it is not in vain that he says, \"I am the first, and also the
last.\" For so are we men, we change God in general, 1) and believe that
he is changed. We do not believe that he is the first and the last at
the same time. Thus the whole papacy changes God, because it is called
in the forgiveness of sin, and yet lives in the satisfaction of works.
Thus the Jews change God, because they accept the promises of Christ,
but reject the Christ presented to them. Therefore, it is a great thing
to know that the same God is the First and the Last, so that those who
are called to the Church enter the realm of everlasting grace, so that
even if we sin and fall more often, we do not fall from grace, since we
are, as it were, enclosed in the heaven of grace.

**V. 13. My hand has founded the ground.**

\(19\) Why do you take refuge in other gods and other help? Do you put
your trust in my power? I have strength enough; only wait in silence and
hope \[Is. 30, 15J, so the redemption will come.

**V. 14. 15. Who is among these who can proclaim such things?**

20 \"Such things\", namely from Cyrus. As if he wanted to say: I alone
promise it, therefore wait also alone on me, who gives you such. It is
the decision of the prophecy of Cyrus, therefore he praises him.

**The Lord loves him.**

21 He means the Cyrus. The Jews did not believe that they could enter
again in this way.

1\) Erlanger: vers instead of: kere.

but they ridiculed it as void. For the world always ridicules God\'s
word as something foolish. Therefore, one must wait for help in all
distress by faith alone, and not take refuge in works or other help,
which is our natural inclination.

**V. 16. Come to me and hear this.**

22 This passage has been whimsically obscured. The Jews understand the
person of the prophet. And this opinion I will also follow. For if it is
understood of the person of Christ, this does not rhyme with his saying
that he was sent to Babylon to accomplish redemption there. For he was
sent only once at the time of the New Testament. If one wants to
understand the spiritual mission, this passage will not give any special
proof of the mystery of the Holy Trinity. However, one may accept either
opinion, whichever one wants. For we have other and stronger testimonies
of the Trinity. I take it from the person of the Prophet, who is, as it
were, in the midst of Babel, comforting his own. \"Come near to me,\"
the Isaiah. \"I have not spoken this in secret,\" that is, in vain and
into the wind. It will indeed come to pass, it will certainly come to
pass, what the Lord has foretold through me. For at the time \"when I
was there\" these things happened; that is, when I was alive, and
foretold these things of Cyrus, they happened in faith. \"But now GOD
the LORD hath sent me, and his Spirit,\" that is, now that my prophecy
is fulfilled, I come in the Spirit.

[23 Similar passages are also found in Ezekiel, Cap. 3, 14 \[Vulg.\]:
\"He lifted me up in the Spirit.\" And in the Revelation of John \[Cap.
21, 10.\], \"And led me away in the Spirit.\" Likewise in Lucas \[Cap.
1, 17.\], \"He shall go before him in the spirit of Elijah.\" So Isaiah
came to Babylon, first by the promises, although he was in Judea, as
Paul says, he was with the Colossians in spirit 2) \[Col. 2, 5.\]. On
the other hand, he is]{.underline} 2) Jews Latin editions: so spiritu
Roma6 esse. The Wittenberg has in the margin: Rom. I. But only Rom. 1,
13. could be forcibly interpreted here.

570 L- xxm. 77-79. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 910-913. 571

came to Babel in the Spirit, since these promises were fulfilled.

\(24\) Now this passage serves to strengthen the Jews, that they may
believe the promises which, as they saw, the prophet had foretold with
such great certainty.

**V. 17. I am the LORD your God, who teaches you what is useful.**

\(25\) He speaks to the people who were living contrary to the word. You
seek all other ways and means to set yourself at liberty, except me,
while they are all utterly useless and ungodly, because they are chosen
without faith and without the word from you. Hear therefore (thou that
art captive in Babylon) my prophecies, and be not separated from me, and
fall not unto other gods: follow not after thy pretensions. For I am
your God and your Redeemer, who teaches you what is useful. Therefore
stand fast by my word, and nowhere else. But what happens? In temptation
we prefer to hear everything else than what we should hear; so, when we
are in sins, we prefer to follow our sensation, and judge according to
the sensation. But we do not want to wait and patiently endure. These
words have an emphasis: \"The Lord, your God\". As if he wanted to say:
I am not your Satan, but I teach and instruct you through promises that
will surely redeem you; just believe.

**V. 18. 19. O that thou wouldest observe my commandments.**

He explains in what way what he teaches is useful. As if he wanted to
say: You seek the way of peace by leaving my word, and keep above your
presumption. But \"the wicked have no peace, and disaster is in their
way\" \[Isa. 59:8, Rom. 3:16\]. In this way you will not attain peace.
There is only one way if you want to have peace, and that is to believe
the word. This is an excellent passage, which gives us the

Word, and all misfortune threatens the godless despisers of the Word.

27 He calls \"righteousness\" the forgiveness of sins and a just
administration of both the temporal government and the priesthood.

\(28\) Peace must be taken in general, both inward and outward; and
righteousness both for the forgiveness of sins and for the good works by
which we do good to one another.

**V. 20: Go out from Babylon.**

After preaching against the unbelieving Chaldeans and Jews, he concludes
this prophecy with an exhortation to the Jews to leave all religions and
their doings and follow Cyrus, who would lead them back. But also this
admonition was despised by the Jews. For the largest part remained at
Babel.

**Proclaim and let these things be heard.**

Offer the sacrifice of praise and give thanks to God for this great
benefit.

**V. 21. They did not thirst as he led them in the wilderness.**

31 He alludes to Egypt. Now the Lord will do exactly what he did in
Egypt. He will redeem his people and lead them back in the greatest
safety. Thus he includes thanksgiving in memory of the past blessing.

**V. 22. But the wicked, says the Lord, have no peace.**

32 This is a general saying that without faith there will be neither a
good conscience nor lasting happiness. But actually it refers to the
unbelieving Jews who were left behind in Babylon.

\(33\) And here is the end of the prophecy of Cyrus, which contains
various and lovely exhortations to faith.

[572 L. xxm, 7S-81. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 49, I. 2. W.
VI, 913-917. 573]{.underline}

**The forty-ninth chapter.**

The prophets generally deal with two things. First, they teach the
people of their time about faith and good works. They comfort the
afflicted and frighten the unbelievers. Second, they also prepare for
the Christ to come. After Isaiah has finished the first part, he starts
a new book and prophesies about the future kingdom of Christ until the
end. Sometimes he also casually punishes the unbelieving and stubborn
hypocrites.

2\) Furthermore, because the kingdom of Christ was to be a kingdom of
faith, in which the world would punish many things as foolish and
unrighteous, the prophets speak magnificently of it, so that the godly
would not be offended by its lowly form. But the Jews, seduced by these
glorious promises, are waiting for a physical kingdom. Since this has
not yet happened, they think that not everything has been fulfilled and
really accomplished through Christ.

3 Therefore, these promises must be understood spiritually, and do not
refer to a fleshly kingdom. For this transitory world cannot bear the
fullness of such great promises. Therefore let us open our hearts and
grasp the word in faith, by which alone it can be grasped. For before
the world the opposite is before our eyes.

V. 1. **Listen to me, you islands, and you peoples far away, pay
attention.**

The prophet speaks in the person of Christ. But notice to whom he
speaks. He does not speak as before: Hear, you of the house of Jacob,
you of the house of Israel; but he breaks forth against the whole world,
and calls all Gentiles. Therefore this sermon does not belong to the One
people of the Jews, but to all men, as Christ commands, \"Go ye into all
the world. \"2c. \[Marc. 16, 15.\]

**The Lord has called me from my mother\'s womb.**

5\. he boasts of his profession to strengthen the hearts of the
Gentiles, so that they will not be drawn to

The Lord said that he would not let the foolish and weak figure of
Christ, who is preached as a crucified one, come into his way. Do not
despise me because of this, he says, I come in divine power
(autoritate). Despise not my word, for it is not my word, but his who
sent me. Thus Paul also boasts of his profession, not for vain honor,
but to strengthen the disciples so that they would not doubt that the
word he preaches is the word of God, and so that he would clear away the
scandal of the poor gospel, which is covered by the cross and the most
despicable figure.

**He has remembered my name.**

6 I do not come to you by chance, but I was ordained and determined from
my mother\'s womb that I should be your Savior and Redeemer. This name,
this office, was given to me by the Father.

V. 2. **and has made my mouth like a sharp sword.**

This is a wonderful kingdom. He has boasted that the Lord has called
him, and that God has remembered his name; he has encouraged us to wait
for him, as a great and mighty king, who will come in precious gold
\[Ps. 45:10\]. And behold, he adds, \"He has made my mouth like a
sword,\" that is, my kingdom will not consist in weapons, not in power,
not in wisdom, not in worldly wealth, but in the mouth; that is, my
office is to preach the gracious forgiveness of sins.

\(8\) For this reason he compares his mouth to a sharp sword, so that he
may show that the word of Christ is powerful and penetrates the heart.
Thus we see in our time how it penetrates the papacy and devastates it.
For it punishes the world, and shows the righteousness of Christ; but
all other righteousnesses, all other religions, works,

574 L. xxiii, ru-84. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 917-920.
575

He rejects and abhors the things that are done without the Word. But
that he adds:

**With the shadow of his hand he has covered me,**

9 Thus he indicates the happiness and the progress of the word. For it
is resisted in the world, as our times also testify; and yet it cannot
be suppressed, but breaks through against the will of Satan and the
gates of hell.

**He has made me a pure arrow.**

10\) \"Arrow\" means the same as the sword in the foregoing; for it
signifies the powerful action and the happy progress. The prophets liked
to use this image of the arrow. Thus in the Psalms \[Ps. 78, 57. Hos. 7,
16.\]: Ephraim is a loose bow, that is, it is good for nothing, like a
bow that does not hit and that is drawn in vain. And in the 127th Psalm,
v. 4: \"As arrows in the hand of a strong man, so do young boys go\";
that is, a world regiment thus blessed by God is like an arrow that
surely hits 2c.

V. 3. **You are my servant, Israel.**

\(11\) These words, as I have said, serve to comfort and strengthen us,
that we may know that the word of Christ, which we have received from
Christ, and that we may teach others, or that we ourselves may learn, is
the true word of God, though the whole world denies it, being offended
at the feebleness of its form.

\(12\) This passage also praises the joyful certainty of the heart, that
is, the certainty of our profession, that he says he is called by God
and is God\'s servant, so that in everything we teach or do, we may be
certain of the divine will, that it pleases God. Otherwise, no one will
be able to endure misfortune or temptation if he is not certain that he
is called by God to do so. Just as Muenzer, having stirred up the
peasants\' revolt without a profession, and having been caught and put
in bonds, finally said that he had been seduced to it by presumption,
whereas before he had prided himself on nothing but the spirit and the
profession.

That is why the strongest consolation in times of challenge is to know
that one is called.

But he calls Christ \"Israel\", and in this name he includes the whole
kingdom of Christ or the whole church, which was first gathered from the
rest of the Jews and then from the Gentiles.

**By which I will be praised.**

14\. instead of: Qui in te gloriabor translate: Glorificabor in te
myself will be praised in you\], that is, you alone will teach my glory.

15 Furthermore, the glory or praise of God is that he alone is
righteous, kind, wise, and powerful. From this it follows that all men
are liars, fools, evil-doers and sinners 2c. But if we teach this, we
stir up the whole world against us, and are condemned as heretics, that
we forbid good works, condemn the church 2c.

**V. 4. But I thought I was working in vain.**

\(16\) He takes comfort in the fact that few follow the word, and almost
all the people reject Christ. Although, he says, few follow my teaching
and most condemn it, I am comforted by the fact that the matter
(judicium), that is, my ministry, is not mine but the Lord\'s. The word
is nevertheless powerful in those who follow it, however few they are.
This is a mighty consolation in temptation, which has often refreshed us
in such great distresses of our doctrine, that we know that it is not
ours, but God\'s, that he governs his work, to which he has drawn us
against our will.

**Although my cause is the Lord\'s.**

The prophet turns his eyes away from the trouble and straightens up with
his office and profession. My work, he says, is God\'s work, although it
seems to be going badly. For judicium means here the office or the
thing, as in the 9. 1) Psalm \[v. 5\].

18 This is a necessary consolation with which I have very often risen up
against the

1\) In the Latin editions: ksalnio 7.

576 **L. xxiii, 84-86.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 49, 4-8.
**W.** vi, **920-923.** 577

Satan\'s thoughts, that he interprets the present troubles to the
gospel. If God had not closed my eyes and I had seen that these troubles
would come, I would never have begun to teach the gospel. Now I am
comforted by the fact that I know that my ministry is God\'s ministry.
This certainty sustains me against all evils.

**V. 5. And now the Lord speaks 2c.**

19 Again, he recites his calling. The greatest part, he says, is carried
away into error, therefore the Lord has sent me to the remnant of the
people, who are to be preserved by the gospel, lest all Israel perish.
What the Latin translation has given: Et Israel non congregabitur, which
must be translated thus: \"That Israel be not taken away\" or perish.

**V. 6 And saith, It is a small thing that thou art my servant.**

20 The Gentiles also are to be saved through the gospel. This is a very
clear passage, that we Gentiles are to be incorporated into the body and
kingdom of Christ, so that we may have a share in the testament, the
promises, and the grace of God. For Christ is to be the light of the
Gentiles, a master and teacher of the Gentiles, so that the Gentiles may
be saved through him. Therefore, all of us who are of the Gentiles and
except Christ are the true seed of Abraham.

21\. to be converted to God is that the hearts are enlightened to the
knowledge of God through the word of grace, so that they know they are
to be saved by grace alone, not by our works.

22\) This passage contains the most powerful resolution of all the
reasons on which the Jews base their arguments against us Gentiles.

**V. 7. Thus says the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.**

23\) Having made a new man out of a twofold man, that is. A church of
Jews and Gentiles by the word of the gospel, he adds a general
consolation for those who stand in this faith in Christ.

For faith is immediately followed by the cross; as the 116th Psalm \[v.
I0\] says: \"I believe, therefore I speak; but I am greatly afflicted.\"
But the world, and the devil, the father of the world, can tolerate all
other religions, all idolatries; only against this faith in Christ they
rage, this they cannot suffer. That is why he comforts the believers. Do
not despair, he says, do not fall away when you are thus afflicted for
my sake. Your word, which you follow and which the world seeks to
destroy, will remain forever, and those who follow it now will be
converted and accept my word.

He calls himself \"the redeemer of Jacob. 1) Therefore, by the very word
by which he extols himself, he expresses the character of the church,
that it is of such a nature that it needs a redeemer, a saint, a
justifier. For before the world there is nothing more wretched, nothing
more godless and nothing more unholy than the church. Therefore he calls
it \"a despised soul,\" \"a people abhorred,\" \"a servant among
tyrants\"; these are the glorious titles of Christians; if anyone is
ashamed of them, let him think that he seeks Christ in vain. And so the
glorious promises are fulfilled, that he saith, Thy seed shall be a holy
seed 2c. That is why I said at the beginning that they must be taken in
the spirit and in faith in the Word. For in the world we experience the
opposite.

**Kings shall see, and rise, and princes shall worship.**

\(25\) Those who persecute you now will worship you and be converted.

**For the sake of the Lord, who is faithful.**

The world thinks the opposite, that God is a liar and we are condemned.
But the prophet calls Christ \"the Holy One in Israel\" because He
sanctifies His own.

**V. 8. I have heard you at a gracious time.**

He continues to comfort. Paul uses these words for exhortation 2 Cor.

1\) Instead of laool), Israel should probably be read.

578 \" xxm, M-88. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 023-926. 579

6:2, just as Christ exhorts: \"Believe in the light, because you have
the light, that you may be children of light\" \[John 12:36\], and Paul
Romans 13:11 ff. For it is a very grievous challenge when we grow weary
of the Word. For since Satan assaults this doctrine first by force
through the princes of the world, then by cunning through the heretics,
he also tempts each one in particular through the vice which the Greeks
call, of which the Scripture says: \"Our soul is disgusted with this
loose food\" \[Deut. 21:5\]. Because this vice spreads very widely, it
does much harm. For the tyrants and heretics benefit the church, and
bring the faith and doctrine of the church into disarray. The acedia,
\[indifference\] however, makes people snore, secure, weary, and exposed
to all the arrows of Satan. Therefore, this encouragement is necessary,
that we be vigilant. Before this time I would have preferred one psalm,
if I had understood it rightly, to all the riches of the world; but then
the heavens were iron and the earth was closed. But now that the windows
of heaven have opened, we begin to be disgusted with it. Whoever has
read through the New Testament only once, admires himself, and thinks
that there is nothing left that he does not know well. Therefore, it
will happen that the word will be taken from the ungrateful and given to
another people, whom we may not know.

**I have heard you at the gracious time.**

28 Thus he calls the time of the revealed gospel, which, though
contested in many ways by the world, is nevertheless preserved against
Satan, against tyrants and heresies, because it is \"the gracious
time\".

**And have set thee for a covenant among the people.**

29 These words are said to the church. For as Christ is the covenant
between God and men, so the church of believers is the covenant between
nations, through the ministry of the Word, that we may safely believe
Him. As Christ says: \"Who

He that heareth you heareth me\" \[Luc. 10:16\], likewise: \"Whose
soever sins ye remit on earth, they are remitted unto them in heaven\"
\[Matth. 18:18\]. Accordingly this is a golden text, which serves to
confirm the ministry of preaching in the church, which is transferred
from Christ to the church, that the latter also may be truly justified
by the word, or by absolution, but in such a way that this may precede,
as he says, \"I have kept you.\" For this saying, \"He who hears you
hears me,\" does not apply in those things which the bishops command
against the word of God. And this is only the Church, which has the pure
Word and the pure Sacraments.

**That you take the distraught inheritance.**

\(30\) This is the Gentiles, who have been devastated by idolatries and
false righteousnesses, by the devil and ungodly teachers. For as often
as the gospel comes, it finds the earth devastated by ungodliness and
idolatry.

**V. 9 To say to the prisoners: Go out.**

The gospel teaches that all should know that they will not be saved by
their actions or works, but by the mercy of God through grace, freely
offered in word. ^t^) It is not only a word of command, but rather a
promise that the church should be a servant in this; that those who are
imprisoned in superstition and in their righteousness, and are unable to
do good, will be set free. For the law is a prison, inasmuch as it is
regarded as a teacher of works, and imprisons the conscience. From this
prison we are delivered only by the ministry of the gospel, which
teaches that we are not delivered by our works, but by mercy through
grace, in vain, for Christ\'s sake, who was given up for us on the
cross. This doctrine frees the conscience from sins, from the law, from
the ordinances of men, and from all burdens.

t\) Instead of what follows in this paragraph, the 1532 edition offers:
The gospel therefore first frees us from sins and death, then teaches us
the way of peace, and makes us secure above all ranks.

**580** L. xzin, 88-sr. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 49, 9-12,
W. vi, Ws-sss. **581**

**That they may feed by the way, and on all the hills have their
pasture.**

This can best be understood by the contrast. Before the Gospel was
known, we thought that there was no pasture to be found unless we bound
ourselves to certain rules, both in walk and in works. The Franciscans
did not believe that they could be blessed apart from their corner and
without their cap, and so did others. But now that the gospel is
revealed, the sects cease, and the forgiveness of sins and eternal life
are found in all places, in all persons, in all ages, and in all
conditions. For the gospel is a free doctrine, which is not bound to any
order, to any place, to any person, to any certain class. Both the
master and the servant, both the king and the subject have the gospel.
For we are all equally called to grace. The situation is quite different
in the secular government and in the household, for not all households
can be governed in one and the same way. So every state has its own and
special laws 2c.

**V. 10. They will neither hunger nor thirst.**

The gospel will overflow with righteousness like a river. To water and
to feed means to encourage and to teach in general. The drink is the
encouragement, which is necessary and makes the food alive, which is the
teaching. Where the word is, these fruits must follow. But those who are
weary and have lost the word do the opposite, as we see in our heretics;
they oppress the land and disturb the inheritors.

**It will not sting heat nor sun.**

\(34\) I understand it not of persecution, but of the heat of
conscience. They will be well armed, and have comfort through the word
that conscience cannot terrify them.

**For their Beneficent God will guide them.**

35\. you are in the kingdom of mercy, not under a tyrant, but

under a \"Beneficent\", who did not command them the word in such a way
that he himself is not present, but he is present as he says: \"I am
with you to the end of the world\" \[Matth. 28, 20.\]. Likewise: \"And
the Lord worked with them, confirming the word by signs that followed\"
\[Marc. 16, 20\].

He calls the consolations of Scripture \"springs of water. But here he
indicates the opposite figure in the church. For if they were not
thirsty, he does not forbid fountains of water. For the church feels the
sting of the law, it feels the sins, it feels all that is contrary to
these promises: that it is ruled, not by a merciful man, but by the
enraged Satan. For the conscience is troubled in the saints by its
plagues, by Satan and by sins, and every Christian is troubled by
conscience outwardly and inwardly. That is why they need the word, so
that they may always be raised up with it, enlightened by it as blind
men, and delivered as prisoners. For Christians are those who have
forgiveness of sins and joy of heart in faith alone, and thereby feel
the contradiction. For if we look at the thing itself, in the church
there is in all things the contradiction; therefore the word is
necessary by which it is established, and believe that it is as it is
described here, even at the time when it feels the contradiction.

**V. 11. I will make all my mountains paths.**

\(37\) Thus we see with us that all estates walk in their ways. The
authorities, father, mother, son and servant know that their status is
pleasing to God. Before this knowledge, only the monks were considered
to be in a state pleasing to God. Furthermore, it also indicates that in
faith there is no respect for persons. According to faith, servants are
equal to great kings, and vice versa.

**V. 12. Behold, these will come from afar.**

38\. by the four regions of the heavens he shows the nature of all the
states, that not

**582** L. xxiii, 9i-N. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 929-932.
**583**

the Jews alone would be God\'s people, that not only the celibate and
the monks, but that in all classes, in every age, in all places there
would be Christians. \"From the sea\" means among the Hebrews as much as
from the evening.

What the Latin translator has given: a terra australi \[from the land of
the noon\], with it he has correctly rendered the sense, only that here
a proper name is put, \"from the land of Sinim\", of which 2 Mos. 17, 1.
is spoken. But he uses the plural to indicate that he is speaking in
general, that the word makes no distinction of persons, orders 2c.

**V. 13 For the LORD has comforted his people.**

40\. This is because he has given the word of grace and forgiveness of
sins. Because he redeemed from the righteousness of the flesh, from the
terror of hell and death, from the tyranny of Satan 2c. Therefore Paul
calls it an unspeakable gift of the gospel \[2 Cor. 9:15\]. Those who
are sincerely moved by it thirst for it all the more and rejoice, for
they alone understand this grace and this treasure. The rest are weary
of it.

**V. 14. But Zion says, \"The Lord has forsaken me.**

\(41\) We have heard the glorious consolations and promises of the
church, but if one consults sensation, the opposite is true, as Paul
says in 1 Cor. 4:9 ff. and 2 Cor. 6:4 ff. Therefore, the Holy Spirit
here precedes our thoughts, as if to say: You hear my consolations and
my promise of salvation and enlightenment, but I know what you want to
object to. For you feel that you are darkened, bound, oppressed by
Satan, by sins, by the wrath of God and by the fear of death. You feel
that you are abandoned. But hear the word, and let your thoughts go, and
follow not your feelings, but take hold in faith of these promises of
mine. For I will not deceive thee, but thou shalt know, as much as
outward appearances may be, that thou art forsaken.

the opposite, that everything I promise will certainly come to pass 2c.
But here you see the groaning, of which Paul also says that it is
inexpressible.

4I. \"But Zion speaks,\" that is, those who are the true church, and
have the gospel and so great a wealth of promises, cry out that they are
forsaken of God. This must be especially noted. For this passage can
give great consolation to the troubled and distressed souls, that the
terrors they feel are not evil signs, and that not only they suffer
them, but that they are signs of the true church and the true members of
Christ.

**V. 15 Can a woman forget her child and not have mercy on the son of
her womb? Even if she forgets him, I will not forget you.**

This is an excellent consolation, but it is not understood without
faith. He refutes the cries of the afflicted by a very well-known
example. For the female sex is merciful by nature, because it is born by
nature to mercy and to love. Therefore, the Hebrews also give a woman
the name of the mother or the mother\'s womb, because the woman is made
to love, just as the man is made to protect. Therefore, there is no
living being that has more mercy than a woman, especially in regard to
her child. That is why we say \"a mother\'s heart\" for a very loving
and kind heart. Therefore he comforts us with a likeness of the Holy
Spirit, and tells us to look at a mother who has a son. Just as natural
love does not allow her to forget or abandon her son, so I cannot forget
yours.

44 Here reason recognizes the likeness, but it does not believe that it
is such a child in the womb, and does not believe that it is carried,
but thrown away, and cruelly tossed to and fro. Here is no other advice
than to rely on the word alone, excluding all senses, and with simple
faith,

**584** L. XXIII S3-SS. Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 49, 15-18.
W. VI, S32-93S. **585**

against feeling and expectation, believe that it is as the word says.
For all that is apart from the word is nothing but fear and trouble. So
we are plagued in many ways today. First, by tyrants who persecute us
with sword, water and fire; then by the spirits of the wicked. In
addition, our name is greatly hated and desecrated by all, and Satan in
particular attacks everyone with the terror of conscience and divine
wrath. Therefore, according to the judgment of the flesh, we are
absolutely lost.

45 Therefore, if we do not overcome these outward feelings and cling
only to the word, so that we believe that God has not abandoned us, but
is a very kind mother who lovingly cares for us and carries us, then it
is all over for us. For it was not for this reason that he gave us his
word, not for this reason that he called us to the church through his
word, that he wanted to abandon us, but through the temptations and
through our tribulations he wants to show us the power and the strength
of his word. What appears to be abandonment is rather a test, so that we
may learn by our own example the power of the word 2c. And such promises
are only to be believed, not grasped with the hands. But our thoughts,
and our reason, and the judgment of our flesh, are deceitful; therefore
we ought to believe the word of the promise rather than the sensation
and affliction of the flesh and conscience.

V. 16. **Behold, in the hands I have drawn you.**

In the inner side of my hands (palmis) I have drawn you. The \"hands\"
signify the divine power and the divine effects. Therefore he says: I
cannot forget thee, for thou art marked in my hands; that is, I am
mindful of thee in all that I do, whether I raise up tyrants or sects
against thee. In short, all that I do, I do for your good, just as Paul
says: \"To those who love God, all things must be for the best\" \[Rom.
8, 28.\]. Thus, the Emperor Augustus opened the world through peace, so
that the Evan

The king of Babylon led the Jews to Babylon so that the word and the law
of God could be spread among the Gentiles. Thus the king of Babylon led
the Jews to Babylon, so that the word and law of God might be spread
among the Gentiles. Thus Joseph was admitted to the court of King
Pharaoh, so that he might plant the religion there and promote its
growth. Thus he says: \"Everything I do, whether good or bad, is done
for you and for your benefit. You are always before my eyes, because you
are marked in my hands. These are words of faith that must be believed.
For if one consults reason, the contradiction is before his eyes.

**Your walls are always before me.**

There is an emphasis in the word \"before me\"; before my eyes, not
before yours. For we feel that we are exposed to men, to devils, to
sins, to death and to hell. That is why the walls are invisible, and you
can only believe them. The red spirits see their walls; the tyrants see
their walls. Here the sense must be reversed that the walls of those are
nothing because they are seen by human eyes, but our walls are before
the eyes of God.

V. 17. **Your builders will hasten.**

This is a promise of procreation. You will not be exhausted, but
reproduced.

**But your breakers and destroyers will get away.**

49\. He admits that there are breakers and destroyers in the church,
both tyrants and heretics. But he says: Be patient only a little, \"they
will get away,\" but you will be delivered. For all the suffering of the
godly is little, and lasts but a moment, because it is ordained by God
that it should not last long. But according to our feeling it is
eternal, because of the despair, because one does not see any way of
redemption.

V. 18. **Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold.**

\(50\) Where there are tyrants and heretics now, hereafter you will see
everything that delights you.

586 L. xxm, 95-98. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 935-938. ,
587

Where there are idolatrous pagans now, there will be your brothers
afterward, who follow the same word, the same religion. Thus we read
that the pagans who killed the apostles worshipped them afterwards,
since they were converted to the faith.

**As I live, says the Lord, you shall 2c.**

\(51\) Those who are now a burden to you and oppress you shall, after
they are converted, be a praise, glory and honor to you. Thus today
Wittenberg has been blasphemed as a source of all heresies; but it will
happen after some years that it will be praised by the descendants as a
garden of God, from which the gospel has been planted in Germany and in
all parts of the world.

**V. 19. For your desolate, disturbed and broken land 2c.**

52\. you are like a desolate and forsaken land; there are few of them
who cling to you, but you are very happy to be planted. But notice that
procreation begins with desolation and destruction. Therefore, let us
not despair nowadays. For although the church has a bad reputation, and
there are very few of them who teach the word purely and loudly, it will
not fall, but will be propagated, if we only stick to the word.

**V. 20. That the children of thy barrenness shall continue to say in
thine ears.**

\(53\) He says that the church is barren, yet it has many descendants.
For its fruitfulness is hidden, but its barrenness is outward
appearance. Hence the words in the Psalms: \"I am lonely and miserable\"
\[Ps. 25, 16\], likewise: \"Save my lonely from the dogs\" 2c. \[Ps. 22,
21.\]

**V. 21: Who begat these for me?**

54\. notice the sad words with which the Holy Spirit describes the
church, that it is barren, one that is not birthed, solitary, cast out,
rejected, lonely 2c. For they describe to us the outward appearance of
the church. But should one be ignorant of the

because of despair? No. For it follows that this lonely one marvels at
her numerous children. For God is so powerful that He can give more than
we understand, as Paul says \[Eph. 3:20\]. Thus, as the Church cared for
the Jews, the Gentiles were also added, and the Jews became apostles and
leaders of the Church. It will be the same with us. The blood of the
brother Heinrich von Zütphen, and of Leonhard Kaiser 1) and other
saints, will, if we only remain constant in the word, awaken a rich seed
of believers. For in this way the church is planted; it is not
multiplied, unless it is barren and lonely. On the other hand, the
adversaries and heretics will not be eradicated until they have become
many and have grown. This is a good consolation for our time.

**V. 22. Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles.**

The Holy Spirit hereby responds to the future wonderment of the Church.
For because the church does not see the future happy progress, it holds
the present form of the church against it, as if to say: You promise
that I will be fruitful in a very glorious way, but I see and feel the
opposite. Therefore, show me my children and brothers with fingers.
Therefore the Holy Spirit answers and says: I know that you do not see
your children whom I promise. But turn not thou from them; labor thou to
birth, practice the word, suffer in faith, and wait upon me. For I will
bring thee forth, and the word shall be unto me as a banner, to which I
will gather thy children 2c.

**That is how they will bring your sons in their arms.**

The gospel is not a violent teaching, as the laws are, but it carries
gently in the word that the children come here of their own free will,
not out of compulsion.

1\) In the Wittenberg: \"Leisers\", in the Jena: \"Kehsers\", in the
Erlangen: \"Lesers.\" Now his name is actually \"Käser\", but he is
usually called \"Kaiser\".

**588 XXIII, 98-100.** short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 49, 23-26.
**W. VI, 938-941. 589**

**V. 23. And the kings shall be thy keepers.**

57 He indicates that kings should also be converted. Thus Carl the
Great, Theodosius and other great princes have accepted the Word, and
fed the Church with rich alms, preserved peace, protected Christians
from violence and injustice. So today our Elector of Saxony applies his
government for the benefit of the Church by maintaining the teachers of
the Word. Some have taken this passage from the goods given to the
church. But I hardly believe that goods have ever been given to the
Church for the sake of the Gospel, but rather they have been snatched
from the emperors by fraud and theft of the popes.

**They will fall to the ground before you and lick your feet.**

He expresses here with figurative words the reverence that great princes
would show to Christians.

**Then you will know that I am the Lord, in whom those who wait for me
will not be put to shame.**

\(59\) He concludes these great promises with the word \"wait,\" so that
we may persevere in the tribulation, and then we will receive all these
things, however impossible they may seem. But this is actually the work
of Christians, waiting for the Lord, which cannot be feigned by anyone.
For reason by nature takes recourse to other help.

**V. 24-26. Can a giant also be robbed?**

\(60\) This is an objection in which the church disputes how the Lord
can provide children for it. As if the oppressed church wanted to say:
You promise a great offspring, but I see how impossible this is with
such great power of the enemies. For the children you promise are among
the tyrants, who hold them as a sneeze holds a robbery. They are so
blinded and hardened among the heathen that it is impossible to save
them from death and hell, by which tyrants, as it were, they are rightly
held.

the, to snatch. Therefore he answers: I, the LORD, will provide both
that thou mayest have many descendants, and that they who oppose thee
shall perish by their own strength. For this is it that he saith \[v.
26.\], And I will feed thy oppressors with their own flesh. \"2c.

**Or can the righteous man be loosed his captives? 1)**

61 Thus, among the Jews, the people were held captive by the Levites and
teachers under a title of law, for their worldly regiment was instituted
by GOD Himself. And yet the apostles abolished the whole law. But from
where did they have this authority, since the gospel is only a spiritual
teaching, and does not abolish external statutes, which may originate
from Moses or concern other regiments? This is what has happened to us.
We have been under the rule of the pope and the bishops; but why have we
shaken off the same from us, since the gospel could have been taught,
even if these burdens remained? These are the strong sneezes of which
the prophet speaks in this passage. And also Paul was much troubled by
the handling of this matter, since he wanted to take away the glory and
title of \"the righteous\" from the synagogue. I answer: The apostles
are commanded to teach the gospel; this they teach, and do nothing
contrary to Moses, except that they leave consciences free, and do not
violate the ceremonies, except in so far as they hold souls captive. For
the body is subject to all burdens, but the conscience is not to be
subject to anyone, because it has liberty through the gospel, that it is
free from sin, from death, from the law, from hell, and from all human
statutes. But since the synagogue is not satisfied with the rule it has
over the body, but also wants to rule over the conscience, it happens
that by demanding something unreasonable, it also loses what was
reasonable, and with the observance of the ceremonies at the same time
also

1\) The fact that only here the second part of v. 24. is subsequently
set and interpreted is due to the fact that the section from here to the
end of the chapter is added only in the edition of 1534.

590 L- xxm. 100-102. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 941-944.
591

the worldly regiment is lost. For God wants to save His children; since
the synagogue does not want to let them go, it loses both.

62 Thus, if the pope would remain under his rule, and at least leave the
consciences free, we would be obliged to remain under his rule, because
the gospel is not seditious, nor does it make free from external
burdens. But because he does not want to do this, he also loses what he
has under one title.

of law, because it is written Apost. 5, 29: \"One must obey God more 1)
than men.\" This is therefore the reason why both the Jews and the
Papists perish. For God offers them this, that they should keep the
worldly rule; they should only leave the consciences free. Since they do
not want to do this, he takes away both.

1\) odeäirs oportet is missing in the editions.

**The fiftieth chapter.**

1\) Because the prophet began in the last part of his prophecy to speak
of the kingdom of Christ, which was begun and confirmed by the calling
of the Gentiles and the rejection of the Jews, just as Paul speaks of
the olive tree in Romans 11:24, he stays with these two pieces almost
alone, so that he both calls the Gentiles to the church and comforts,
admonishes and stimulates the others from the Jews.

\(2\) Further, there are two lawful ways in which the law separates
husband and wife. The first, that the wife was given a bill of
divorcement; the other, that she was sold. Now because the synagogue has
separated from the church, he accuses her as a harlot who has departed
from her husband without any cause. I have not given thee a bill of
divorcement, saith he, I have not sold thee; but thy iniquity and thy
wickedness is the cause of this divorce.

**V. 1. Behold, you are sold for your sin.**

This is the cause of rejection. Just as today nothing is left undone by
us, so that we may bring both the papists and the sectarians back on the
right path. We do not exclude them from the Church, but they exclude
themselves.

V. 2. **Why did I come and was no one there?**

4\. He proves that their wickedness was the cause. I have come into the
flesh, he says; I have died for you, I have risen; I have fulfilled all
the promises as one present and truly given, but you have not received
me. As it is said in John 1:11, \"He came into his own, but his own
received him not.\"

**Has my hand now become so short? 2c.**

\(5\) He boasts of his power against the Jews, and reproaches them. As
if to say, \"You hold me in low esteem because I come without any
splendor. You look to a fleshly kingdom, and despise this weakness. But
this is my way. I have never redeemed you through power, but always
through weakness, in which is the highest strength and power; and then I
use to be most powerful, when one thinks that I am not able to do
anything at all. For this is what God does: as often as he wants to deal
with us, he uses those figures which the world considers the most
foolish and weakest. Thus he commands to sprinkle water on his own in
holy baptism, so that sins may be washed away. What could be more
incongruous than to be doused with water in order to overcome death and
hell, to which the miserable breath of the Holy Spirit is added?

592 V. XXIII, I0S-I04. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 50, 2-6. W.
VI, 944-947. 593

of a sinner who performs baptism? So it is with all the other works of
God, that He may make our wisdom foolishness, that we be not
presumptuous:

**Behold, with my rebuke I make the sea dry.**

\(6\) I, the weak God, have dried up the Red Sea with a word that is
considered the weakest of all \[Exodus 14:21\], so that I might redeem
you; therefore, do not be offended by the lowly form. Although this is
historical, it can be explained according to the secret interpretation
that he pushes the mighty ones from the chair \[Luc. 1, 52\].

7 Furthermore, the prophets often repeat this example of the Red Sea,
because it contains an excellent picture of divine help. For what could
have been conceived that was weaker than to deliver a people through the
sea, in which they would certainly drown and die, as the Egyptians
experienced. Therefore, this water was not a water of life, but rather a
water of death; and yet God works the opposite through this water,
making it quite powerless to harm and very powerful to save. This was
the power of the word. Thus, everything that is outstanding among the
works of God was done in very special weakness. But God does this to put
our wisdom to shame, so that we will not be presumptuous about anything.

**V. 3. I clothe the heavens with darkness.**

8\. I, the weak God, covered the sky with clouds on Mount Sinai so that
no star could be seen \[Ex. 19:16\].

**V. 4. The Lord has given me a learned tongue, that I may know how to
speak in season to the weary.**

\(9\) If the weak form offends thee, open thine ears, and hear the word
which the Lord hath given me. Thus he refers them from the outward
appearance, by which weakness is seen, to the word, so that those who
are offended by the outward appearance may be edified by the word. There
is an after

The word \"discipled\" is used in the same way as in Latin: linguam
discipulatam, a tongue made a disciple, which speaks nothing but what it
has learned from God. It is not a tongue of a master, but of a disciple.

**He wakes me up every morning (mans).**

\(10\) Here he shows the usefulness and power of the word, that it is
never without fruit, but bears fruit both in him who teaches it and in
him who learns it. This passage is to be remembered for the external
word, which the unholy and rebellious spirits despise today.

\(11\) \"Early\" (mane) means at an occasional time; not when we will,
but when he wills, and by whom he wills.

**He wakens my ear, that I may hear as a disciple.**

\(12\) Instead of quasi magistrum, it should be translated, \"That I may
hear as a disciple. When the Lord gives the word, he also gives
disciples. Our red spirits, although they hear, read and say many
things, say, read and hear everything as masters, in order to
distinguish themselves and to judge us, yes, also in order to judge the
word of God, and not in order to learn it.

**V. 5. And I am not disobedient.**

13 He shows here by his example the fruit of the word. For the word
makes me patiently endure everything that comes my way; I do not flee
from the cross, but, comforted by the word, I do not refuse to endure
even death.

V. 6. **I kept my back to those who struck me.**

14 This is to be understood of the suffering of Christ. For he praises
and extols to us the power of the word. Thus the church would rather
suffer death ten times over than deny the word of God either with works
or with the mouth. Such great power is in the word of God, which seems
weak and foolish to those who perish and want to be masters. But to us,
who are disciples, it is the highest power.

594 L. xxm. 104-107. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 947-sso.
595

15\) Furthermore, as Christ here 1) says of Himself that He is, so is
the church today and at all times, namely subject to the thugs and
brawlers.

**V. 7. for the Lord helps me.**

This is the power of the Word by which Christ is upheld. Furthermore, if
one looks at the outward appearance, the contradiction is before one\'s
eyes, and one thinks that Christ with the church is pressed by God and
Satan at the same time, and that there is no help anywhere.

**That is why I have presented my face as a pebble.**

The face is in itself the softest and most delicate part of the body. It
must be as hard as a pebble in Christ and in the church to endure the
blows. Therefore, Christians should not despair in adversity, but know
that they must present their faces as rocks, and hope that they will
retain victory through the Spirit and the Word. This is an excellent
strengthening and comfort for those who suffer for the sake of the Word.

**V. 8. 9. Who is he that will condemn me?**

Here the stone face rises against the enemies with great joy, which we
also must have. Today we are accused in many ways, we are condemned as
heretics and rebels. Some cry out that we are reintroducing the papacy,
others weigh us down with other calumnies; in sum, all that they sin,
they burden us with. Therefore we take refuge in the word, and say here
with Christ, \"Who is he that would condemn us?\" For we know that all
these accusations are falsely laid upon us by the adversaries. Just as
David also mocks his enemies before the Lord, \"Have I done these
things, and is wrong in my hands\" 2c. Ps. 7, 4.

**Behold, they will all at once grow old like a garment.**

1\) Erlanger: they instead: Lio.

\(19\) This is a good comfort against the enemies of Christ and the
church. But just as the help of the godly is not visible before the
world, but rather seems to be pressed down, so also the corruption of
the wicked cannot be seen, but they flourish; and they themselves grate
and devour others, and are not grated nor devoured by others. Therefore,
faith is necessary here, in which we expect that this will happen one
day. For the Holy Spirit will not lie. And it seems as if the prophet
used this simile to indicate that the wicked do not perish immediately,
but that God gives time for repentance. If they neglected to do so, the
tyrants would perish, but the word of the Lord would remain forever.

**V. 10. Who is there among you who fears the Lord?**

20\. Christ is presented to us in two ways: first as a gift, then as an
example. Now here he communicates his person to all as an example. If
anyone,\" he says, \"fears the Lord and delights in words, he will be
overwhelmed with many tribulations; he will walk in darkness, that is,
he will be afraid and distressed in the world. Therefore, if he follows
my example and hopes in the name of the Lord, he will surely know that
just as I have been saved and glorified, but my enemies have perished,
so he also will be saved and his enemies will perish.

**He hopes in the name of the Lord and relies on his God.**

This is the only way to salvation, the only refuge in misfortune, to
\"hope,\" not in human counsel and help, but \"in the name,\" not of
man, but of God. But it is annoying to have nothing to rely on but the
mere name of the Lord and the Word, which is as it were a strong lock to
which the righteous takes refuge, lest he perish in the evil time
\[Proverbs 18:10\].

**596** L. xxm, 107-109. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 50, 11.
51, 1. w. vr, \[so-954. **597**

**V. 11. Behold, all of you who light a fire.**

22\. the fire which ye have kindled, and the flames which ye have sought
to gather upon me, will I turn upon you, as it is said in the 7th Psalm,
v. 16, 17: \"he is fallen into the pit which he hath made.\" Likewise,
\"His calamity shall come upon his head.\" Likewise in the 37th Psalm,
v. 15, \"Their sword shall enter into their heart.\" So also the law
says, \"With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you\"
\[Matt. 7:2.\]. This is how it was with the Jews; they killed Christ so
that the Romans would not come and take their land and people \[John
11:48\]. But because they killed Christ, they themselves are killed and
perish. But Christ rises again in glory and reigns.

**Walk in the light of your fire.**

23\. \"Fire\" means persecution. So now he says: You are armed with all
kinds of persecutions, but your fire shall consume you. This is how God
understands this art, his enemies and persecutors he makes with their
own

drunk with the blood \[Is. 49, 26\]. And as the one says:

> . . . Nec lex est aequior ulla, Quam necis artifices arte perire sua.

\[There is no cheaper law than that those who put people to death by
their art perish by their own art.\] Here, God promises that He will do
the same. Therefore, the godly should comfort themselves with such
scriptures, so that while they see nothing but their ruin and
tribulation, they believe that their enemies will perish rather than
they 2c.

**You must lie in pain.**

You Jews, who have been armed with fire and sword against my church,
will have to suffer what you have intended others to suffer, and will be
nothing but a miserable, oppressed yeast of the people. You will not
stand or sit, but lie down, so that you will never rise again, without
kingdom and without priesthood. This will happen to you by my hand, who
despise and reject me as a weak God.

**The fifty-first chapter.**

He continues to comfort the church gathered from the rest of the Jews
and from the Gentiles, which is afflicted for the sake of the Word. Thou
church thinkest thou art a forsaken widow, and forsaken of me: but
despair not, when thou considerest thy small number and thy barrenness,
because he whom thou believest is able to multiply thee, and to make of
a barren one a fruitful one. See Abraham, who died, and Sarah, who was
barren, to what numerous offspring they grew. Furthermore, the situation
with you is not as hopeless as with Abraham and Sarah. Therefore, do not
lose heart, have confidence 2c. Thus, with the excellent example of
Abraham, he comforts all who are lonely, forsaken and barren according
to outward appearance, for the sake of the word.

**V. 1. Listen to me, you who pursue righteousness.**

He speaks to those who, as it were, despair when they look at the
outward appearance of the world. As if he wanted to say: You, who do not
despise the word, but want everything to be right and governed
everywhere 1) do not despair!

**Look at the rock from which you are hewn.**

3\. as if to say: as impossible as it is for men to be born from a
stone, so it was impossible for a descendant to come from Abraham. And
yet you, such a great people, came from this single and dead man, with
whom there was no hope.

1\) Erlanger: reeto instead of: reets.

598 D. XXIII, I09-II2. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, SV4-SS7.
599

4 This consolation is especially for bishops and pastors; they should be
raised up in this way, so that they believe that their ministry is not
ineffective, even though outwardly no fruit seems to follow. For he who
will not be satisfied with his office until he has converted all and
made them Christians will never have peace. Just as Abraham found
contempt for God everywhere, and yet did not become fainthearted, and
did not refrain from remaining steadfast in the true religion for
himself and with his family, and from instructing others in it, so do
not become fainthearted, but continue in the ministry commanded to you
by God, and let God see to the continuation of His word. He calls
Abraham a rock because he made his face a rock and overcame that
hopeless condition by faith.

**And of the well tomb, from which you are dug.**

5 Thus he calls barren Sarah a well of rock.

V. 2. **For I called to him while he was yet single, and blessed him.**

There is an emphasis in the word \"single\". As if he wanted to say: Do
not look at the crowd of the outcasts and at your small number, even if
you are single and lonely. For I can make you a very great people. This
example of Abraham undoubtedly served as a great comfort to the
apostles, who were moved by the anger of the rejected multitude. And we
today, in the miserable state of the church, comfort ourselves in the
same way, that however few there are who accept the true religion, it
will nevertheless happen that we, like Abraham, will grow through divine
blessing, and the church will also come to the descendants in a
respectable form.

V. 3. **for the LORD comforts Zion.**

7 Now he applies the example of Abraham, and explains the state or form
of the church, that the church is like a single Abraham, and like a
wilderness, and a heap of ruins, but it will be made a reality by the
divine

Blessing grow, and be like a cultivated pleasure garden. ^u^)

\(8\) So today our brethren who are here and there in the ministry of
the gospel write to us that the word is everywhere miserably despised.
But what shall we do? For the prophet also makes the same complaint
here, and calls the church a desert full of ruins. Therefore, let us
resist this trouble by faith, and continue to exercise our ministry in
patience and doctrine, and it will come to pass, as the text says, that
our deserts will become gardens of pleasure, and become like the garden
of the Lord.

\(9\) But let each one apply this to his own person. 1) For in the
church this loneliness is not so perceived; but we, as individuals, feel
that we are barren rocks and a purer desert, without faith, hope,
patience, chastity, and other gifts. Against this feeling we are to
raise ourselves up by this promise, and believe that either we are not
altogether barren, or if we are, we are to know that we have a God who
promises that we should call upon Him and wait for His blessing.

V. 4. **Mark me, my people!**

\(10\) Here he adds the way in which the church is to be increased and
made into a garden, not by hands or any force, but by a new law, that
is, by the gospel, which not a Moses alone will spread among the Jews,
but Christ Himself through His apostles in the whole world. Therefore it
cannot be understood from the law of Moses. And is an excellent and
clear passage of the abolition of the law. For it promises a new Moses,
a new law. This cannot be a law of works, because the law of Moses was
such, but it is the law of grace and mercy, by which we are justified if
we take hold of it in faith.

u\) Instead of U8 and 9, the 1532 edition has: \"But each one must also
apply this to his own person, so that if someone feels that he is as it
were forsaken in faith, hope, chastity and other gifts, he nevertheless
does not despair, but believes God, who promises blessing.

1\) Wittenberger: aooonanaoäars instead of: aooornmoäari.

600 L. xxm. 112-114. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 51, 5-9. w.
vi, \[s7-sso. 601

**V. 5 For my righteousness is at hand, and my salvation goeth forth.**

11\. change the adjectives \[in the Vulgate: justus meus and salvator
meus\] into substantives, \"near is my righteousness and my salvation,\"
that is, the disposition of the righteous church, and the victory in
faith.

**And my arms will judge the nations.**

12\. I myself will rule among the nations by my power. For \"to judge\"
is as much as to rule; as it is said of Samson, \"He judged Israel
twenty years,\" that is, he ruled \[Judges 16:31.\].

**The islands are waiting for me.**

The church will be planted among the Gentiles and thus grow.

**V. 6 Lift up your eyes to heaven.**

14\. You, who are so without hope, and are troubled because of the
appearance of barrenness, look at the heavens and the earth, which seem
to be eternal. But heaven and earth will pass away sooner than my
salvation and my righteousness, which I promise you. For it is not a
temporal or fleshly righteousness, but an everlasting one, as it is said
in the 111th Psalm, v. 3. \"His righteousness endureth for ever.\" As
much as the outward appearance disputes with my promise, nevertheless
you shall be received by me, and that in everlasting righteousness and
in everlasting salvation.

**And those who live on it will die there, like Das.**

\(15\) This \"that\" is pointing (xxxxxxxxx), as if one pointed to a
hair or a floccum. But it indicates a great courage and joyfulness of
heart to believe that the righteousness promised to us in the mere word
will be greater and more lasting than heaven and earth, in comparison
with which heaven and earth are nothing.

**But my salvation endures forever, and my righteousness will not
despair.**

1\) In the Erlanger the Bible words are missing, and instead of oomlQuta
the senseless reading: eommunicata is found. (Not a misprint.)

\(16\) This righteousness, which you hold, is eternal; it will never
cease, while your enemies will perish like moths. These things are true
in the heart and in the sight of God; but in the sight of the world they
are reversed and false. For we are rather a garment that perishes, and
like a moth.

**V. 7. 8. Listen to me, you who know righteousness.**

17 This is an encouragement. Since your righteousness is so great, why
are you afraid of tyrants, who are no more powerful than moths and
worms?

\(18\) Now the reproach of which he says here is not only the reproach
with which men reproach us, but much more those which Satan and
conscience reproach us. Therefore, all this must be taken on faith. For
in the sight of the world we are moths and worms, as Christ also laments
\[Ps. 22:7\]. In contrast, the righteousness of the adversaries seems
eternal, shining and triumphant; and yet it is true that all our
adversaries, both spiritual and corporal, are moths. The moth cannot
bear to be merely attacked, but is immediately crushed. For such moths
faith considers the tyrants, who are iron and brass before the world.

**V. 9. Come, come, show power!**

19 To the consolation he attaches this either as a song, or as a
thanksgiving, or as a prayer, and asks that he may publicly display his
power. But they are words of great emotion that he says, \"Well, well,\"
as if God were in a deep sleep. For our God is weak and foolish before
the world, and so are His people, and they cannot establish justice
against the tyrants and heretics. Therefore, they take refuge in prayer
and ask for help.

**Well done, as of old, from ancient times!**

20 In the past, you showed your arm and your power in a mighty way when
you struck the arrogant Egyptians and wounded the dragon, that is, when
you drowned Pharaoh when your people left Egypt. Do the same thing now.

602 L XXIII, II4-II6. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 960-S63.
603

**V. 11. So the \"redeemed\" of the Lord will return.**

21 He confesses that the church is captive and not yet redeemed; it must
still lack joy and gladness. For the church has her Egypt, and is
oppressed with many temptations of the world, of Satan, and of
conscience. However, Christ promises: \"Your sorrow shall be turned into
joy; but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy no one shall take from you\" \[John 16:22\]. Thus believers have the
most certain comfort that God will come and redeem them. But this is
burdensome, that Christ \[Joh. 16, 16/ and Peter \[1. Ep. 1, 6.\] say
that we have to be patient for a little while. For this \"about a
little\" seems to us to be an eternity at the time when we are in
temptation; therefore we have need of this comfort from the word.

**V. 12. I, I am your comforter.**

22\. He encourages our hearts to look to the one who speaks to us: I,
God, comfort you; not money, not silver, not honor, not the world 2c.,
but my word and my Spirit will sustain and protect you.

**Who are you to be afraid of people who are dying?**

\(23\) You are afraid of a man who terrifies you; why then will you not
be lifted up when I comfort you? For I am God, who fills heaven and
earth; those are water bubbles, moths, a straw, a drop in the bucket, 1)
a tittle in the balance, dust, lighted thorns 2c. Therefore he says he
is a comforter, not a fearful one, though the flesh so judges at the
time of tribulation; but it judges evil. For we are not afflicted that
we should be afflicted and perish, but that the power of the word might
come to pass, and that faith might increase, which in resting would grow
dim.

1\) Erlanger: stilla, situlas. Similar punctuation errors are often
found in the Erlanger edition. For example, in z 21 in the passage Joh.
16, 22. is interpunctuated: ilsrum, viäsko.

V.13. **And forget the Lord who made you.**

24\. I am your creator, not your executioner or tormentor, and my power
is so great that I have stretched out the heavens and founded the earth.
Therefore, you have no reason to fear that I do not have enough power to
redeem you.

\(25\) But this is how it is: the godly are too afraid of the name of
God; the wicked despise it too much out of security. Hence it is that
different sermons are found in Scripture. For the sermon of forgiveness
of sins belongs to the broken-hearted and humble, to raise them up; but
the law and the threats belong to the secure, to crush them, with whom
God speaks as a consuming fire.

**Where was the fierceness of the Wütherich?**

26 He sets the example of Pharaoh and the Jewish people, so that he may
judge the afflicted church. Just as he perished, so will your enemies
perish.

27\) Translate this passage further: \"Where was the fury of the fierce
one, when he had to hurry and run about to open (that is, to release)
the people of Israel, but they (that is, the people of Israel) did not
die under the destruction, and they (that is, the people) did not lack
bread?

V. 15. **His name is called LORD of hosts.**

28 That is, a Lord of men of war. For he that would be a Christian, let
him remember that he is a man of war, standing in the battle array,
opposed to all the arrows of Satan and the world. For confession is
followed by the attack of the devil. Therefore we also are called
Zebaoth, and our Lord \"the Lord of hosts,\" because he reigns among men
of war.

V. 16. **I put my word in your mouth.**

This is the way God comforts us and makes us triumph, namely through the
word. He does not put weapons in the hand, but puts his word in the
mouth: with this word we console the

**604** L- XXIII, II6-II9. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 51,
16-19. w. VI, 963-966. **605**

Brethren, and put Satan to flight with our adversaries. Therefore, it is
a great thing to be certain that you have and teach the Word of God. In
this alone consists our power. Therefore, this must first be
ascertained, whether the Word of God is what we teach and follow. When
this is established, and the heart is strengthened by certain
confidence, then it is easy to endure, suffer and overcome everything.

**And cover yourself under the shadow of my hands.**

\(30\) I will not only put the word in your mouth, but I will also
protect you against the cross that oppresses you. He promises
protection, which is absolutely necessary for those who have the word,
because of the temptations and attacks of the world and Satan. As I have
said, let us first see if the Word of God is what we teach, then the
protection of God\'s hand will surely be there in the midst of
tribulations.

**That I may plant the heavens and found the earth.**

He calls the church a new heaven and a new earth, which God plants and
establishes by the outward and oral word, and by our fleshly mouth, that
I may say so. Therefore, these are ungodly and unholy spirits who
despise the oral word.

V. 17. Wake up**, wake up!**

32 \[Instead of: elevare, elevare\] translate: \"Wake up, wake up!\" For
he indicates that the church lies in a deep sleep and snores, because of
the many misfortunes, so that it is plagued. However, these words are
also comforting. He admits that the church is oppressed and trampled
underfoot, exposed to the violence of all, oppressed by tyrants and
mobs. For he indicates this by \"the cup of wrath,\" the yeast of which,
as he says, she has drunk up. But who can understand it but faith alone,
that with a beloved people anger and mercy can be at the same time?

33\. but he calls it \"a cup of the fierceness,\" because the measure of
the cross determines

and measured, and a \"cup of staggering,\" as is also called in the 60th
Psalm, v. 5, \"a drink of wine that we staggered\"; likewise a wine
which, when drunk, makes one stagger, as in the 107th Psalm, v. 27.
\[That is, we are sometimes so forsaken, and so immersed in temptations,
that we know no more counsel, and there is no escape before our eyes,
that we groan as despairing ones, and groan for help. For this is the
drunkenness of which the prophet speaks here, which encompasses all
spiritual and physical ills.

34 But this is most surprising, that he says it comes \"from the hand of
the Lord. Therefore, as many holy martyrs as there have been who have
led the regiment in the church or have confessed the name of Christ,
these have always been thrown before the devil\'s jaws. And even though
this is the devil\'s wrath and not God\'s, the Scriptures still call it
God\'s wrath, because God allows this to happen, and the whole thing is
in the hands of the Lord. For Satan and the world cannot do more harm
than they are allowed to do. Therefore they have their certain measure
and their limits, which they cannot exceed, as Job says in a beautiful
image \[Cap. 38, 8. 10. 11.\] that Satan and the world are like the
roaring sea, which seems to want to go out over its banks, and yet does
not go over the banks, but the waves crash against each other 2c.

**V. 18. There was no one to take them by the hand.**

The misfortune is so great that no human being can provide any help in
it.

**V. 19. These two have met you.**

36\. Namely, the drunkenness from which you staggered, and the
abandonment of your children, that you were both oppressed from all
ropes, and had no one to stop you, in whose bosom you could pour out
such great tribulations. In this way, the Holy Spirit precedes us, as if
to say: I know that this will happen, you must not think that I do not
know your sufferings; it cannot be\....

[606 L. xxin, iis-121. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, we-sss.
607]{.underline}

happen differently. But I know it, and count thy sighs and thy tears, as
it is said in the 56th Psalm, v. 9: \"Count my flight, grasp my tears in
thy sack.\" But this requires faith and experience.

**There was disturbance, harm, hunger and sword.**

With these, the church is persecuted in general. We feel the sword and
the violence of the wicked today, we also feel hunger. For it seems that
the world has conspired to kill the ministers of the gospel by hunger;
so great is the wickedness of the peasants, burghers and nobles
everywhere.

**V. 20. Your children were fainting.**

The grammarians argue about what orix is; we take it for a forest ox.
For the church is like a wild animal in the forest, against which all
vent their hatred, by hunting, entangling, slaughtering. Thus Paul says
\[1 Cor. 4, 13.\] that the Christians are taken for sacrifices of
sweepings, by whose death God is reconciled, and men are delivered from
the wrath of God. For this is what the words catharma and peripsema
mean. Not only do they suffer persecution, but they also suffer the
wrath of the Lord, and the rebuke of our God, that is, their conscience
suffers distress, and feels that it is pressed by the wrath and
displeasure of God. This, I say, is what we Christians suffer. On the
other hand, those epicures and swine are safe, and everything goes very
happily for them, but only for a time.

**V. 21. 22. Thus says your ruler.**

\(39\) This is a promise that the church will be delivered from all
evils and that her enemies will perish. For God does not forsake her in
the greatest distress; but this is the highest art, if one can believe
with certainty that the rejected will not be rejected, and the condemned
will not be condemned, as Joel says, Cap. 3, 15: \"Let the weak man say:
I am strong.\"

**Behold, I take the goblet from your hand.**

40\. he calls it a cup of wrath, not that it is a true wrath and anger;
for how can god be angry with us, whom he has made his

children, be angry? But the Holy Spirit speaks according to our heart
movement, because we think it is true anger when we are scolded by the
Lord.

**V.23. But I will give him into the hand of your shepherds.**

Today, the papists will not stop persecuting and oppressing us until
they perish. They do not want the peace that is offered to them. So now
we have presented our bodies as if they were earth, and as if they were
an alley to be walked over. They have trampled our backs like dung.
Therefore, it will happen one day that they will experience what God is
threatening the persecutors of the Church here.

So far, the prophet has treated excellent consolations for the church,
which are written in the Word and are not based on any external, visible
or sensually perceptible help. Therefore our treasure is hidden and
invisible. For apart from your word there is no comfort. The
worldly-minded people of today, who nevertheless presume to have the
spirit, teach that one attains the spirit in another way than through
the word. But this is most dangerous. For such people will either
despair in the challenge or lay hands on themselves. For Satan can get
the best of them above all others, because they are not bound to the
outward word and to the rock, which alone can withstand the force of the
waters and the storms.

\(43\) Therefore, let each one be careful to hold this word, which he
reads in the Bible, which he hears from the mouth of a man, very high.
For since Christians cannot live without the cup of the cross, they need
the word that promises them the opposite of what they presently feel.
And if one believes the word, that is the certain victory. For it
relieves the present sensation of pain, which no outward thing can
relieve; and it also hastens salvation. For Paul reminds us, not in
vain, \"that through the consolation of the Scriptures we have hope\"
\[Rom. 15:4.\]. Likewise, \"All Scripture, inspired by GOD, is
profitable for doctrine\" 2c. \[2 Tim. 3, 16.\]

[**608 L. xxin, 121-123.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 52, 1.
2. W, **vi, 970-973. 609**]{.underline}

**The fifty-second chapter.**

The prophet began to prophesy about the kingdom of Christ, the gospel,
the faith and the church. However, he did not treat this subject in one
speech, but, as we are wont to do in our sermons, he alternated the
treatment with other figures. Therefore, it seems as if he starts a new
speech about the same thing. He sees that the synagogue is oppressed
with many tribulations and plagued with many wars and prisons, therefore
he promises Christ in this chapter. As if he wanted to say: \"You have
been imprisoned and redeemed so many times, and then again devastated;
well, I will one day bring about a redemption that will be eternal, and
which will be followed by no more imprisonment, no more desolation, that
is the redemption, since Christ has swallowed up sin, death and hell
through his death on the cross, and has redeemed us through an
everlasting deliverance \[Is. 45:17\].

**V. 1. Zion, show your strength.**

2\. as if he wanted to say: it is present that you shall be redeemed and
transferred to a new and eternal kingdom; therefore be courageous, and
use the ornament, use this freedom and grace. But he connects
\"strength,\" which is required for war, and \"adornment,\" which is
required for the time of peace. For the gospel accomplishes both: it
guards us with strength against sins and death, and also adorns us with
the exercises of faith, with love, and with the gifts which the Holy
Spirit brings to believers, as chastity, wisdom.

**For no uncircumcised or unclean shall reign in you (Quia non adjiciet
ultra, ut pertranseat etc.).**

IntrLrs means according to Hebrew language to administer an office, to
govern. So it says 5 Mos. 23, 3: \"The Ammonites shall not come into the
congregation of the Lord\" (intra-.

colorful). For the Ammonites were not forbidden to convert to the Jews
and to become proselytes, but they were not supposed to administer a
public teaching office, which God wanted to keep in His people.
Therefore, he promises that neither pagan tyrants (for he calls them
\"uncircumcised\") nor hypocritical Jews would administer offices in the
true church.

**V. 2. Get out of the dust.**

4 As he described two kinds of tyrants, so here he describes two kinds
of captivity. For these two things, \"dust\" and \"bonds,\" must be
distinguished from one another. For the former signifies the bodily
captivity, and the latter the spiritual, which is under the laws and
statutes apart from Christ. For the captivity of conscience is that by
which man is taken captive by the imagination of a made (falsi) sin. For
where Christ does not shine in the heart, it is impossible that man
should not make a captivity of the laws. The cause is this, because man
by nature has this wisdom: if you do not keep this and that, you will be
damned.

\(5\) This is helped by the physical and spiritual tyrannies who demand
of us the works of the law and other statutes. But in the church and in
faith in Christ, neither the civil nor the Mosaic laws bind or condemn
the conscience. For they are to extend only over the body and over
external things; consequently they are neither to harm nor to help a
conscience that has been made free before God through Christ. And the
conscience shall keep Christ, who is above and apart from all laws, and
afterwards keep these laws out of guilty love, apart from the
conscience. And this is Christian freedom, of which we have written more
elsewhere 1).

1\) Cf. Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, 986 ff.

610 xxin, 123-126. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 973-976. 611

**V. 3. You were sold for nothing; you shall be redeemed without
money.**

6\) \"In vain\" you have been delivered into the hands of the Gentiles,
that is, the Gentiles have not been punished for this robbery, but they
have dealt with you unpunished according to their will; therefore it
will happen that you will be redeemed again in vain. So today we have
been redeemed from the yoke of the priest in vain, that is, without any
previous merit and without the punishment of sin, because we have
blasphemed and crucified Christ in all sermons and on all altars; just
as still today the whole priesthood does without repentance. Therefore,
it must necessarily fall.

V. 4. 5. **My people went down first into Egypt.**

7 By this comparison he magnifies the tyranny of the Pharisees. My
people have been hard pressed in Egypt under Pharaoh, hard pressed by
the Assyrians \[2 Kings 18:13 ff\], but that is nothing when compared to
the tyranny of the drivers of the law, the Pharisees and Sadducees, who
plague the consciences in the most pitiful way. Just as if we said
today: The tyranny of the princes is great, but what is it against the
pope? For those only corrupt bodies and goods, but the pope corrupts
souls in a cruel way.

**Its rulers make vain howling.**

8 Instead of inique agunt translate: They have made howling. But here we
see what a great sin it is not to teach rightly. For it is not teaching,
but vain weeping and blaspheming God. And evil teachers are unclean
birds, flying in darkness, disturbing and frightening the consciences
with their howling, and wearying the wretched hearers with vain works.
They are also blasphemers, because they deny grace, and ascribe
righteousness to works. Such night owls and owls are nourished by
Pabstism. But it seems that Paul alluded to this passage, Rom. 2, 24:
\"Because of you, God\'s name is blasphemed among the Gentiles.\"

V. 6. **Therefore my people shall know my name at that time.**

\(9\) I will take away the office of these hypocrites and false
prophets, and gather the people unto me, that they alone may hear me.
Thus he abolishes the teaching office of Moses and the priesthood of the
Old Testament, which was in a certain family, and says: he will be the
shepherd, whom the sheep alone shall hear and follow; but the rest they
shall all despise, whether they be bishops, or popes, or Moses himself.
This freedom was started by the apostles and still continues in the
church today. But it is not a carnal freedom, but a spiritual freedom.
For in the flesh there shall be no freedom, for we are to be subject to
our parents, to the authorities, and in sum to the servants of all. But
in spirit and conscience we are completely free from all bondage; there
we believe no one, there we trust no one, there we fear no one but
Christ alone, who reigns with joy and gladness in the midst of
tribulations, with power and strength in the midst of sins. Furthermore,
if anyone doubts that the prophet speaks of the kingdom that is in the
Word, let him hear the following:

**V. 7. How lovely on the mountains are the feet of the messengers.**

\(10\) This is a comparison of the gospel and the law, and a praise of
Christ who speaks through his apostles. Those who teach the law are sad
night-owls, and frighten with their howling; but the messengers of the
gospel have sweet feet, for they bring with them the most cheerful word
for troubled consciences. This is known to those whose consciences have
once been in danger. But it is these messengers \"on the mountains\".
For the gospel is not bound to one mountain and to one people, as the
law is, but it is spread most freely on the mountains, that is, among
the nations, and into all lands; and brings them peace, that is, the
forgiveness of sins. It brings good, that is, joy and gladness, and
other fruits of the Spirit. It also brings salvation, that is, freedom
and redemption from sins, death, and

612 **L. xxiii, I2S-I28.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 52, 7-9.
**w. vi, 976-979.** 613

from hell, and the victory against all evils 2c. The law works the
opposite in the hearts of men.

**Those who say to Zion: Your God is King.**

This is the reason why the Church has such great gifts, because God
Himself, Christ, is King and Teacher. But how could it be otherwise?
There must be everything good where God is and reigns, where death and
sin do not reign, but Christ and salvation itself. Thus, this passage
contains a manifest prophecy of the new word that was to be preached.
For he abolishes all the kingdoms of Moses, of the priesthood, of the
Pharisees, 2c., and makes Christ alone king. This is to be diligently
observed, that we place Christ in his proper office, lest we make of him
a judge, as the papacy did, and of the gospel, which brings peace with
it, a law.

12\. there are many other lessons that can be learned from this passage,
if the words are diligently contrasted. For he says \[v. 5\]: his people
were deceived by others; consequently he has a physical people in this
life. Likewise he promises \[v. 6\] that he will be the teacher of this
people; consequently Christ is true man, and Christ\'s kingdom is in the
word alone. But that he adds \[v. 5\] that his name will be blasphemed;
likewise \[v. 7\]: Your God will be king, it follows that he is God at
the same time, and in the same person true God and true man. From this
it necessarily follows that he will die as man, and that he will rise
again from death as God. From this it is clear that the kingdom of
Christ is spiritual and not physical; consequently it cannot be governed
by laws taken from reason, but only by the word of the Spirit, since the
heart lives and is active in grace and through grace, free from all
laws, punishments and terrors.

\(13\) Therefore, those who think that Christ is a legislator who shapes
morals and, like Socrates, gives perfect examples of virtues, are
mistaken. For although he also shapes the outward action, he first of
all judges the inward man and renews him; after that he also governs
him.

the body, the hands and the feet. For works follow faith, as the shadow
follows the body.

**V. 8. Your watchmen cry aloud with their voice.**

14 He calls the servants of the word \"watchmen\" who proclaim joyful
and lovely things with one mouth. However, he actually indicates the
happy progress of the word through the watchmen. For through the
apostles the foundation of the kingdom of Christ was laid, but through
the watchmen it is planted. Furthermore, a watchman is required to let
his voice be heard. Our bishops today are watchmen without voice, and in
truth mute dogs.

\(15\) Now this also belongs to the description of the kingdom of
Christ, that we should distinguish it from all other kingdoms, that it
should not stand in arms, in violence, in laws, but absolutely in the
joyful word of the gospel, lest we confound the temporal and the
ecclesiastical government with one another.

**V. 9. Let us rejoice and praise one another in the wilderness of
Jerusalem.**

16 Thus he calls the rest of the synagogue, indicating at the same time
that the gospel is a sermon for the poor, as Christ says: \"The poor
have the gospel preached to them\" \[Matth. 11, 5\], and as it says in
the 74th Psalm, v. 21: \"The poor and miserable praise your name. For
none is commanded to rejoice but he that is afflicted, and walketh in
tears and sorrows. And he adds, \"Let there be joy\"; not you who are
the inhabited and adorned Jerusalem, but the desolate Jerusalem. For the
kingdom of Christ is a kingdom made up of afflicted and afflicted in
every way; and the word is a word of salvation and peace, of which only
those are in need who feel condemnation and are afflicted with sins.

17\) But that he says, \"Let us praise,\" means the sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving, which is the only sacrifice of Christians, that they
may recognize God\'s benefits and be grateful, praising and glorifying
God, but not misusing His gifts for their own glory, against their
neighbor.

614 L. XXIII, I28-IS1. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 979-983.
615

**V. 10: The Lord has revealed his holy name.**

> **lig arm 2c.**

18\. \"His arm,\" that is, His power. As if to say, \"Since you have
been deceived and afflicted with sins and conscience, pity you that you
are without an arm, because God, in appearance, is always weak and
foolish; other gods and princes are mighty and wise. But at that time,
he says, he will reveal his arm, so that out of that foolishness and
weakness will come forth greater wisdom and power than that of men. This
whole passage alludes to the 98th Psalm.

**V. 11. Soften, soften.**

After such great promises, the prophet adds an exhortation, as Paul does
in 2 Cor. 6:17 and Rom. 13:11 ff. \"Depart,\" he says, \"from the
kingdom of the world, of sins and of conscience. Take hold of the gospel
and do not miss the time of grace.

**And touch no unclean thing.**

20 This image is taken from the law, which he transfers to spiritual
purity and impurity. But \"unclean\" is everything that does not come
from faith in Christ and from the freely given grace. Therefore, not
only adultery and capital murder and other gross sins must be understood
by it, but everything that is best in a man who is not enlightened by
the Holy Spirit, namely wisdom, religion, righteousness, and those
apparent works which lead men away from trusting in grace to
presumption, and have a very great appearance of holiness. For faith,
which alone is pure, is to be based on grace alone.

**Come out of her, purify yourselves, you who carry the Lord\'s tools.**

\(21\) This belongs to the ministers of the word and to the teachers.
For these carry the vessels of the Lord. As if to say: You who are
teachers, see to it that you are pure. Do not make a trade of the word,
but teach in simplicity. But it is a needful exhortation, by which we
are reminded

first, that we should abide in the true faith; second, that we should
abide in the pure word, without which faith cannot stand.

**V. 12 For you shall not go out in haste.**

22\. he looks at the story of the exodus from Egypt; because from there
they went out with trembling and haste \[Ex. 12, 33. ff\]. This picture
fits well to the work saints; these hurry and tremble, if they are only
a little challenged, and look everywhere for help and protection.
Therefore, so many rules of the monks, so many works and services have
arisen, because they believed that they could ease the conscience and
make it calm by such works.

23 Therefore the prophet exhorts the godly. Ye godly, saith he, follow
not the ungodly, \"for ye shall not go out in haste. You are commanded
not to touch anything unclean and to be pure. This shall not be done by
haste and in flight, that is, by your strength. You shall be delivered
from the ungodly in another way, namely, \"that the LORD go before you,
and that the GOD Israel gather you.\" That is, listen to the word
plainly, because the LORD will go before you. Leave off your doings, and
do not seek to become the author of your own salvation, but let the Lord
rule you by his word and his Spirit, that you may cleave to him alone,
and put your trust in no other work or service.

\(24\) Therefore it is a good exhortation that with simple faith we look
only to Christ our forefather, who will gather us together, that we may
abide in the word, and be safe from all sins. Thus we read of a holy
nun: When she was challenged for sins she committed, she gave no other
answer than that she was a Christian. For she knew that she would not be
condemned for her evil works, because she had Christ, nor could she be
saved by her good works, but that Christ had been offered as a sacrifice
for her. 2c. He had done enough for her sins and deserved eternal life
2c. The following chapter describes the way of salvation.

[**616 L. XXIII, 131** f. Brief Interpretation On Isaiah, Cap. 52, 13.
W. **VI, 983-988**. **617**]{.underline}

**The Fifty-Third Chapter.**

**Of the passion and glory of Christ.**

So far the prophet has described the kingdom of Christ under the cross
and added many and glorious consolations of the church and the
saints. 1) In this chapter, however, he deals mainly with the head of
the kingdom and the regent (principe) of the church itself, namely
Christ. And he also describes the way in which he brought about the
redemption of his own. Therefore, there is hardly any other passage in
the whole of Scripture that speaks more clearly both of Christ\'s
suffering and of his resurrection. Therefore, it should be well known,
in order to strengthen our faith against the Jews, who, angered by the
shame (scandalo) of the cross, do not recognize our Christ as the
Messiah. For it cannot be denied that the prophet in this chapter is
speaking of Christ or the Messiah, of whom he says that he will be
exalted very high, and at the same time describes his humiliation.
Therefore, it cannot be understood of a bodily kingdom of Christ. It
must also be noted that the prophet clearly says that the kingdom of the
Messiah will be both exceedingly glorious and powerful, but only after
his death. For from this we can conclude with certainty that Christ\'s
kingdom is not a physical kingdom, as the Jews dream, but a spiritual
one. Furthermore, in this chapter, which is excellent above all others,
we have wanted to translate more according to the sense than the words,
because the Latin text is rather obscure.

Cap. 52, 13. **Behold, my servant will do wisely.**

He is called \"a servant\", not like Moses was, or like the Werkhei-

1\) In the old translation, this first sentence reads as follows: \"The
holy prophet Esaias has hitherto, in the previous chapters, gloriously
and beautifully spoken of the future redemption through the Lord Christ,
and of His kingdom, which is to come.

The monks who boast that they serve God, but because he is in the
service of the word and because he has the public teaching office. But
that he adds: \"He will do wisely\"-praises to us the ministry of the
Word, which Christ had when he was in the flesh. And this word at the
same time comprehends counsel and prosperity in itself. For although
Christ, because the teachers were not fit, found everything in an
exceedingly difficult and complicated condition, he nevertheless
conducted his office with such great prudence that everything turned out
in the happiest way, and he avoided dangers with the utmost calm, and
accomplished what he wanted without harming anyone, not even interfering
in worldly affairs. But in the word \"he will do wisely\" there is a
contrast, as if he wanted to say: Moses did not govern everything so
wisely, not so completely temperately, but he is a teacher who drives by
force; but Christ delivers us from death, from sin and from hell, not by
any violent procedure, but because he acts wisely, because he gives the
word of life, with which he comforts, sustains and protects us 2c.

**And will be exalted, and very highly exalted.**

He has described the ministry, now he also describes the glory: after
the ministry he will be in glory over all kings. However, although it
could be understood from the glory that he had in the life with the
pious through the miracles, I prefer the other conception, that in the
time of the service he would carry out his ministry diligently and after
his death he would be in the highest glory.

is Christianity to be built up by the word of the gospel, and to
increase and be preserved under the cross and persecutions, and therein
given much beautiful consolation, for the strength of Christianity and
its believers.\"

618 **L. XXIII, 133-135. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
988-993.** 619

Cap. 52, 14. **That many will be angry with you.**

Christ will be in glory, but in such a way that he will be an annoyance
to most of the synagogue, and there will be very few who believe that he
is Christ or a king. The word that is written here, \"They will be
angry,\" expresses the emotion of a person who feels horror and disgust.

**Because his form is uglier than other people\'s, and his reputation
than the children of men.**

Here he describes this glorious king in the greatest lowliness. His
outward appearance, he says, is uglier than that of all other people.
Therefore, the Messiah will not be expected in a bodily kingdom, but in
an exceedingly contemptible and ugly form. For he does not speak of the
form of the body, but of the reputation which he has in his reign,
namely that with him is not the reputation of a king, but of a servant,
and indeed of a very contemptible one. And this is the cause of the
displeasure, of which he said above, as also Paul speaks \[1 Cor. 1,
23\]: the crucified Christ is a displeasure to the Jews 2c.

Cap. 52, 15: **But so shall he sprinkle many nations, that even kings
shall shut their mouths against him. For those who have not been told
about it will see it with pleasure, and those who have not heard about
it will notice it.**

Here he comes back to the glory of Christ, that he will surpass all
other kings in glory. Therefore, Christ is both a king above all kings
and unformed before the children of men; therefore, it necessarily
follows that Christ\'s kingdom is a spiritual one. \"Sprinkle\" means to
preach. Now when he shall have suffered, he says, he shall not only be
preached among the Jews, but also among the Gentiles. Further, Christ
crucified shall be preached, as Paul also says, and yet shall be
believed of, that he is the LORD above all lords. But this the Jews
cannot ascribe to any of their kings that ever were,

that the kings of the Gentiles would have kept their mouths shut to him
about what he said about Christ.

Furthermore, he describes the course of this preaching of the crucified
Christ, as he says: \"To whom nothing has been proclaimed, they will see
it\", that is, everywhere where Christ has not been heard before, there
he will be heard. This preaching will not only be spread among the Jews,
who have heard the promises of Christ, but also among the Gentiles, who
know nothing at all about these promises. This also shows au that the
kingdom is a spiritual one, that he says: \"To whom nothing of it has
been proclaimed\"; that this king will be recognized, not by his outward
appearance, not by his armor and royal insignia, but will be heard and
seen by the word 2c. This is therefore a fortification for our faith,
who preach such a Christ, namely the one who suffered and was glorified,
and spread out through the word.

Cap. 53, 1. **But who believes our preaching? and to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed?**

When the prophet sees the greatness and glory of Christ, likewise when
he sees in the spirit that this wonderful kingdom of Christ is full of
astonishment, but especially when he envisions his Jews, he exclaims:
Ah! who then will believe these things when they come to pass? For even
those who are Jews today believe everything more easily than our Christ.
And also in the Gospel we see how great was the unbelief of the Jews.
Because they were annoyed by that weak figure. And this faith must be
impressed on the hearts by the Holy Spirit. Reason cannot grasp these
things at all. Therefore he says: Who will believe that under this form
there is such a great glory? 2c.

**V. 2: For he sprang up before him like a rice, and like a root out of
dry ground. He had no form nor beauty; we saw him, but there was no form
to please us.**

He continues with the prophecy of suffering. It is just so with this
Christ, he says, as if a fine (elegans) little peplum from

620 L. xxin, 135-137. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 53, 2-4. w.
vi, 993-997. 621

should come forth from some arid place. Therefore Christ is \"the rice\"
and he does not grow before the world, because he has no reputation at
all, as he now says, but \"before Him\". For this is the emphasis,
because the glory of Christ is a spiritual one. Thus it happens that
Christ, having no form, is the most beautiful, in lowliness the most
glorious, in poverty the most rich. The thirsty land is his suffering.
That he now rises again from death is like a rice that grows in a dry
place. \"He has no form\" 2c. In the case of thieves, robbers, and other
malefactors there is still a certain prestige, for men are then moved to
pity when they are executed to the death penalty, but in Christ
everything is detestable and horrible. For he who suffers the greatest
tortures, they also heap invective upon him, and the Jews scoff at him
2c.

**V. 3. He was the most despised and unworthy, full of pain and
sickness. He was so despised that people hid their faces from him;
therefore we did not respect him.**

From this the conclusion is quite clear that the Messiah had to suffer
and to suffer in the most all-embarrassing way. For what he says here
cannot be understood of a glory, but only of the utmost ignominy and
suffering. But this passage urged the Jews that they had to invent two
Messiahs; the one who had come long ago and was still walking around on
earth in the guise of a beggar, so that he would be enough for the sins
of the Jews; but the other as a glorious king, whom they were still
waiting for.

**V. 4. Truly He bore our sickness and took upon Himself our pain. But
we took Him to be the one who was afflicted and smitten and martyred by
God.**

So far he has described the suffering and the glorification of Christ;
now he adds what he did with that miserable and troublesome figure. And
here is the article of justification, that Christ is believed to have
suffered \"[for us,]{.underline}\" as Paul also says \[Gal. 3:13\],
\"Christ was made a

Curse for us.\" For it is not enough to know that Christ suffered, but,
as he says here, we must also believe that he bore our sickness, that he
suffered not for himself, nor even for his sins, but for us; that he
bore this sickness, took upon himself these pains which he did not have
to suffer at the cottage. And whoever really understands this passage
has the epitome of the whole of Christianity. For from this passage Paul
drew so many epistles, so many streams of sayings and consolations.

Furthermore, the conclusions that follow from this condemn all the
pretensions of all men in general, all wisdom, righteousness, holy
living (religionem), works, and all merits by which salvation is sought
apart from Christ. For all this is annulled by this one saying: Christ
suffered \"[for us]{.underline}\". For if this is true, then all works
and all merits, in which trust is placed in an ungodly way, must be
thrown away, and we must also renounce ourselves, and rely with all our
heart on an alien righteousness, so that we hover, as it were, between
heaven and earth, and believe in the righteousness which we cannot
attain with our senses, but which is offered to us through the Word. And
hence it comes to pass that this doctrine cannot be learned except by
the Holy Spirit the Teacher. For because the Jews did not want to have
their righteousness snatched away from them, and did not want the works
of the law to be condemned, they did not receive Christ, because he
appeared in the flesh for this reason, so that we, who were children of
wrath and destined for eternal punishment, might be blessed, protected
and covered by his righteousness.

Therefore, the pronoun is to be paid attention to above all things: He
bore [our]{.underline} pain, [our]{.underline} sickness. For by this
pronoun the suffering of Christ is communicated to us, and it becomes
really ours. For if he bore my pain and my sickness, that is, my sins
and the punishment of my sins, I am therefore free both from guilt and
from punishment, and there is no reason why I should fear the judgment
of God 2c.

622 D- xxm, 137-140. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 997-1002.
623

**We thought he was the one who would be smitten by God.**

That is, we thought that he was punished by God for his own sins. For
this is how the world and reason judge that everyone must suffer
punishment for his own sin. Here, however, the opposite happens, against
human and divine laws, which direct the punishment to the one who has
committed the sin; for Christ is punished for us, which reason can never
comprehend. Now he explains more expansively what this was, that he said
he bore our pains. But it is a very clear passage against the Jews, that
the Messiah was man, a minister of the word, that he suffered 2c.

**V. 5. But he is wounded for our iniquity, and bruised for our sin.**

This is, as it were, a description of Christ suitable to be set against
all other religions. \"He is wounded for our iniquity,\" as if to say:
We have not been able to become righteous by our works, our infirmities
have remained upon us, the guilt and the inevitable punishment have also
remained upon us. But Christ alone bears them, as John also says \[John
1:29\], \"The Lamb of God, which bareth the sin of the world.\" That he
calls him a lamb indicates that he is a sacrifice. That he adds that he
bears the sins, he says the same as here Isaiah. And from this passage
the apostles drew all their wisdom. And we today overturn the pabstry
with this one article. For if Christ is wounded for our sins, it follows
that the pope is the antichrist who wants us to atone for our sins with
our atonements; consequently the works of the monks are condemned and
ungodly; consequently there are no merits for obtaining the forgiveness
of sins and grace 2c. It is surprising that this excellent passage has
not been heeded at all, although it has been sung so often in the
church. For it argues very strongly against meritorious works.

That is why we have to treat them all the more carefully.

For apart from the fact that each one is challenged by trusting in
works, there are also many sayings in the holy Scriptures which seem to
attribute almost to works what is elsewhere attributed to faith. It is
therefore difficult not to be moved by these sayings, since nature also
draws us to them. In addition, there is also the bad teaching and the
quite wrong habit. It is therefore something great and quite impossible
for flesh and blood to persevere in simple faith, so that you do not
despair in your sins, but stand up and say, \"Whether I have done good
or evil, it is nothing to me; here I have Christ who suffered for me.
For opposing sayings are held against us by our adversaries and by our
conscience, which punish our sins and threaten punishment, so that we
tremble, doubting the will of God.

But only through Christ\'s suffering can we dissolve all those reasons,
whether we are challenged in particular or whether sayings about works
are held against us. For if Christ is such a person who bore our sins,
it follows that with our merits we have not borne the sins, because they
are already taken away beforehand. For our works are not Chtist\'s, and
we are not smitten for our sins, nor do we bear them, yea, neither can
we bear them. For neither would Christ have come if we could have healed
ourselves. Thus it is clear how all human works are of no use for
justification and forgiveness of sins, however good and brilliant they
may seem to be.

But there is no religion in the whole world which admits this doctrine
(sententiam) of justification, and we ourselves each for himself
(privatim) believe it only with difficulty, although we teach it
publicly. For this reason, we must learn this passage all the more
diligently, because it is, as it were, the foundation on which the New
Testament or the Gospel is based, and which alone can protect us and our

**624** L- xxm, i4o-i43. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 53, 5. W.
vi, 1002-1007. **625**

Religion differs from all other religions. For Christians alone believe
this passage, and are righteous, not because they themselves do works,
but because they take hold of the works of another, namely the suffering
of Christ. Therefore, whoever believes this article is safe from all
error, and necessarily the Holy Spirit will be with him, for without the
Holy Spirit he cannot be taught or known. But those who have fallen from
this article are exposed to every wind of false teaching.

Therefore, there must be a special prudence in a Christian that he knows
how to put the laws and works in their right place (ordinem) and in
their right use. But he must place this article as high above all laws
and works as heaven and earth are distant from each other. For a
Christian is, as it were, transported into another world, and must know
nothing either of sins or of any merits. Now when he feels that he has
sins, he should look at them, not as they are on his person, but as they
are on the person on whom they are cast by God, that is, he should see
them, not as they are in themselves, nor as they are in his conscience,
but in Christ, in whom they have been atoned for and overcome. In this
way it will happen that he will have a pure heart, free from all sin
through faith, believing that his sins have been overcome and destroyed
in Christ, and that he can also be secure against death, believing that
through Christ\'s suffering and merit righteousness and eternal
blessedness have been offered and given to him. For all this is implied
in this passage of Isaiah.

This is therefore a blasphemous aspectus of sin, when you look at sin in
your heart. For there the devil puts the sin, not God. But Christ must
be looked at; if you see your sins lying on Him, you will be safe from
sins, from death and from hell. For you can say: My sins are not mine,
because they are not on me, but they are foreign sins, namely Christ\'s,
therefore they cannot hurt me.

But it takes a great deal of effort for one to grasp and believe this in
faith in such a way that one can say: I have sinned and

not sinned, so that the exceedingly powerful Lord, the conscience, may
be overcome, which often brings people to despair, so that they lay
hands on themselves with sword and rope. Known is the example of that
\[hermit\] who, when challenged in conscience, said: I have not sinned.
For the conscience also cannot be sure, if the sins are not put far out
of sight. But they must be put out of sight in such a way that you do
not look at your actions, not at your life, not at your conscience, but
at Christ; so that you are put out of yourself and into Christ, and, to
speak with Paul \[Rom. 11:17,1\], are grafted out of the wild olive tree
and out of the world into Christ.

But I do not make so many words about this passage in vain; I know how
much it has helped me. For Christianity is nothing but a constant
practice of this passage, namely, that you think you have no sin, even
though you have sinned, but that your sins are on Christ, who is a
Savior forever from sin, death and hell, as it is written \[John 1:29,
\"God\'s Lamb, who bears the sin of the world.\"

Now that it is clear that the forgiveness of sins cannot be granted
anywhere else than through Christ, who has done enough for us with his
blood, it follows, first, that works cannot set us free from death and
sin; second, that works have another use than that they should justify,
of which we have abundantly spoken above. We see, therefore, how
eloquent this passage made Paul. For it comprehends in itself almost all
the other theological doctrines, that of sin, of death, of life, of
works 2c.

But for this reason, one should not despair of his blessedness if he
does not feel this in his heart and is weak in faith. For Satan
sometimes challenges us in this way, and indeed makes a poison out of
the antidote, and sin out of the highest righteousness. But this should
comfort the weak, that no man has this place perfectly, for this is not
preached for the sake that you may learn it at once, and henceforth have
no more knowledge of it.

[**626** \". xxm, 143-145. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
1007-1011. **627**]{.underline}

You can no longer feel sin; rather, you must guard against it with the
utmost diligence. For it is characteristic of heretics that they unlearn
the whole of Christianity at once. Christians, on the other hand, feel
their weakness in the faith and are challenged with despair because of
the feeling of sin. But because nothing is more corrupting than
security, you must rise up when you feel the weakness in faith. For this
is a sign of a devout and godly heart. For you cling to Christ, however
weakly you may cling to Him. And it is also commanded by God \[Rom.
14:1\] that one should not reject the weak, consequently God does not
hate the weak. For even among the godly there is fear of death, weakness
of heart, sin 2c.

Therefore let those who cannot understand or comprehend this be
admonished not to be frightened by their weakness, but to pray at the
same time with the apostles \[Luc. 17:5.\], \"Lord, strengthen us in the
faith.\" For you are not apart from this doctrine for this reason,
unless you have perfect knowledge of it. For Paul also confesses \[Phil.
3:12\] that he has not yet grasped the same. And it is a Christian, not
who fully understands these things, but who in every way clings to
Christ. For he already has the righteousness of Christ, because he
begins to have it. In the Gospel it is written everywhere: \"And JEsus
spoke to his disciples\" (discipulis). For he calls them \[Schillerest
not masters. But they have the name \[disciple\] from learning (a
discendo), because they learn Christ, not because they have learned him
completely (norint). For although this knowledge of Christ is imperfect,
yet it is a knowledge of Christ, if they remain by the word disciple.
The teaching is therefore complete and perfect, but those who learn it
are not complete nor perfect, but we have only the firstfruits of the
Spirit, not tithes, and reach out to that which is before \[Phil.
3:13\].

Christians, therefore, are the people who feel death and the power of
sin very strongly; but what do they do? In the midst of feeling sin and
death, they nevertheless cling to Christ; they do not deny the Word,
they suffer and abide in Christ.

They do not seek salvation and peace elsewhere. This must be learned
diligently, so that we do not make a Christian into a lump who does not
feel sin. For he still has flesh and blood, therefore he necessarily
feels sin and the weakness of faith 2c. I have said this in many words
in order to put this passage to the heart of the students of theology,
which is, as it were, the foundation of the New Testament, from which
all the treasures of divine wisdom flow as from a living fountain.

**The punishment is on him, so that we may have peace.**

This saying was quoted by Peter \[1 Ep 2:24\]. But the prophet wanted to
use many words in this passage to strengthen us, so that we would know
that Christ is not a judge, but one who carries us. For by nature we
fear God as a judge and do not recognize Him as a Savior. Thus the
papists have made other saviors and mediators, Mary and the other
saints. Thus it happened that to the evil nature was added the ungodly
doctrine. Therefore, those who hear this teaching as young people, whose
hearts are not yet stained with ungodly teachings, are fortunate.
Therefore, when you hear Christ\'s name, let each one think not of a
judge but of the one who bears his sin (de bajulo), and let no other
thought enter their minds, so that they may be accustomed to faith and
have comfort in tribulation.

For thus says the prophet: He was punished that we might have peace,
that is, forgiveness of sins and a quiet conscience. Therefore, if we
want to have peace, it must be through his punishment. He would have
peace, whereas we should have the punishments of our sins, but here
everything is reversed. One sins and another is punished. I wish this
one thing for the red spirits who are now stirring up trouble, that they
may be challenged for a time with despair and fear of death, so that
they may realize what power there is in these words: Jesus Christ died
for us. For if this were to happen, they would easily let go of their
idle thoughts, which are full of anguish.

628 L- xxiii, I46-I48. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 53, 5. 6. W.
vi, ion-1017. 629

**And by his wounds we are healed.**

This is an exceedingly sweet consolation: His wounds are our healing
plaster. But we deserved the wounds, and it was due to him that he
remained healthy. Whoever then desires health, let him not look to his
own chastisement and cross, but only look to Christ and believe, and he
will be healed, that is, he will have eternal righteousness.

**V. 6. We all went astray like sheep, each looking to his own way; but
the Lord cast all our sin upon him.**

Here he begins to speak of the power and benefit of suffering. But it is
a refutation that he says we have gone astray, as if the adversaries
said who labor with works to obtain righteousness: What then are our
holy works (religiones)? He answers: Errors they are. And so he condemns
all the righteousness of the law and all spiritual life (religiones),
even that which was instituted by God in the law of Moses. And this text
enabled Paul to renounce the law; it also enabled us to say that all
monasteries, all foundations, all services are error, because they seek
to be justified by these works. But the prophet here calls all such
works and practices errors.

But these expressions must be carefully observed: \"Our all\" and: \"On
him\". For it is the highest article that this prophecy be believed,
that our sins are not ours, but are laid upon Christ. This one article
is the foundation of the whole church and of Christianity; if it remains
intact, no heresies can harm us. The devil, too, is not so annoyed by
any other thing, which is why he arouses so many challenges against this
doctrine in everyone in particular (privatim), so many heretics, so many
mobs in public life (publice). And also the world can suffer all other
religions, only this doctrine it does not want to suffer, also it
cannot. It has suffered that some have taught that we would be blessed
by the cap of a Franciscan, and many have taught that we would be
blessed by the cap of a Franciscan.

other exceedingly foolish things; for it accepts such things as serve to
confirm our powers and our wisdom. But this one doctrine, which after
all is harmless, even wholesome, it cannot suffer, but undeservedly
accuses, as if it forbids good works, although it gives the ability to
do good works, and also teaches that our works must be truly good. Only
this it takes from works, that our righteousness is not in us, but in
Christ. Because we teach and preach this, the world persecutes us.

For our gospel does not give permission to do everything, as the
adversaries insolently lie about us, but it gives honor to the
authorities and preserves public tranquility, fends off fornication,
promotes and praises conjugal chastity, prevents other sins, and
diligently encourages and exhorts to the fruits of faith. But we will
let the ungrateful and ungodly world do according to its ways; but we
will keep this doctrine, which teaches not our righteousness, but
Christ\'s eternal righteousness. For this alone produces good works; all
that is apart from this is ungodliness and hypocrisy.

But this is completely incomprehensible that the prophet adds: \"All of
us\". Therefore, what does Christ have from us? Certainly nothing but
our sins. We have neither righteousness, nor wisdom, nor any comfort;
again, from and in Christ we have all these things exceedingly
abundantly. This is the glorious fellowship that John praises in his
first epistle \[Cap. 1, 6.\], of which our red spirits know nothing at
all.

And this also is emphatic, that he says: \"The Lord threw\", so that our
conscience would be the more certain and firm, and should not be afraid
of the appearance (facie) of any thing, as if he wanted to say: It is
the pleasure of the Father that you do not fear that he is perhaps
differently minded against us than the Son. But since the Father\'s mind
and the Son\'s mind are one and the same, that they would have thee
redeemed, and that thou shouldest be delivered from all sins: what other
God shall be able to accuse thee? For thy sins are laid upon him, not
upon thee; contrary to Moses\' law, and all other far-.

6Z0 D. xxiii, 148-isi. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
1017-1021. 631

The laws of the law. For thus Moses threatens \[5th book, 24, 16.\],
\"Every man shall die for his sin.\" And in the worldly regime our sins
are ours; but in justification our sins are not ours. Thus Abraham and
Isaac ascend the mountain \[Gen. 22:6\], that is, faith deals with GOD
and takes hold of the mercy promised in the Word. But the servants and
the cattle \[v. 5\], that is, our works, remain at the foot of the
mountain, nor are they admitted to the glory of the forgiveness of sins.
For civil righteousness is so far removed from the righteousness of God.

**V. 7 When he was punished and martyred, he did not open his mouth,
like a lamb being led to the slaughter and like a sheep that falls
silent before its shearer and does not open its mouth.**

This text has been read differently in the church and misused against
the agernisnis of the cross \[of Christ\]. They say: He suffered, but
because he wanted it himself \[Vulg.: Oblatus est, quia ipse voluit\],
otherwise he would have had enough power to defend his life. .This is
indeed a good and godly opinion, but we follow the Hebrew reading. For
hitherto he has described the suffering and the benefits of suffering,
now he describes his conduct (gestum) and the exceeding patience which
Christ had in his suffering. But the prophet agrees completely with
Peter, who says \[1 Pet. 2, 23.\], \"But he put it to him that judgeth
aright.\" Thus this attitude describes the outward conduct (gestum) of
Christ, with how great patience he suffered, as if to say: since he
suffered so severely, he did not threaten, he did not think of revenge
2c. And this is how all suffering of Christians should be; if the world
thinks of nothing else, it thinks of revenge; but Christ did not do so.
Rather, he blessed those who cursed him and asked the Father for his
crucifiers.

But the prophet wanted to show us this glorious attitude of the
sufferer, how he behaved against his crucifiers, with a suitable simile.
A lamb, which is led to the slaughter, is silent, pushes

Not even a sigh, while all other animals scream horribly; so Christ was
exceedingly patient. And this is the highest point (epitasis) of the
suffering; now he passes to the glorification and resurrection of
Christ, with which the Father rewarded the merit of the suffering.

**V. 8. But he is taken out of fear and judgment.**

Here the prophet boasts that he was resurrected, because he had
previously said that he was slain like a sacrificial lamb. Until now
these were only words of death, now he goes over to the opposite and
says: Christ is not dead, God has accepted him. But he would not speak
in this way of a dead man who remained in the grave. It is therefore
necessary that we understand this about the resurrection. He was judged
by Pilate, but again he was taken out of the judgment.

**Who wants to talk out the length of his life?**

Generatio here means the age of life (aetatem), or the long duration
(durationem), or a human life (seculum), as in Ecclesiastes Solomon
\[Cap. 1, 4.\]: \"A generation (generatio) passeth away.\" Therefore the
prophet says, \"This Christ also has an age or duration of life; but who
will be able to reason this out in words? For the life of Christ is an
eternal life. God has set Him in a length of life which no one can
attain in words, for it is eternal. Thus Peter says in the Acts of the
Apostles \[Cap. 2, 24.\] that he was dissolved from the pains of death.
Therefore, if we do not believe in faith, that eternal duration is
incomprehensible.

**For he is taken away from the land of the living, being afflicted for
the iniquity of my people.**

This\' also belongs to the resurrection. But it is not in vain that he
repeats both the suffering of Christ and the purpose of the suffering,
that he suffered for us. For he wants to impress this article deeply on
our hearts, so that we do not hear Christ\'s suffering as we hear
another history, but rather that we look at the benefit and purpose that
he suffered for our sins.

632 L. xxm. **751-153.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 53, 8-11.
**w. VI, 1021-1026**. 633

He said that he was torn away from the land of the living. But that he
says he is torn away from the land of the living indicates that there is
a twofold life: the one which those who live here on earth have and the
other which Christ has, namely the eternal and new life. Therefore, the
Jews wait for him in vain, for he is torn away from this life, having
suffered the death of the cross. Therefore he passed into another life,
as he says \[John 16:16.\], \"I go to my Father.\" Thus Christ\'s
suffering was nothing else than a taking out of fear and the way to
immortal life, in which He is now installed as King and the Head of His
Church, which He rules and sustains by the Word and His Spirit.
Therefore, the Jews who expect a bodily kingdom are mistaken.

**V. 9. and he was buried like the wicked, and died like a rich man,
though he did no wrong to anyone, nor was there any deceit in his
mouth.**

Although the Jews can ridicule the foregoing with their sophistry, these
are quite clear testimonies that Christ was man and truly died.
Therefore we conclude from this passage: if Christ had to die, then his
kingdom cannot be a bodily kingdom in this world, as the Jews dream.

**Like a rich person.**

This is a dark Hebrew way of speaking, that he says: \"a rich man\"
instead of: an ungodly one. Perhaps this way of speaking arose from the
fact that the rich are mostly ungodly, as Christ in the Gospel calls
wealth an unrighteous mammon \[Luc. 16, 9.\], likewise \[Matth. 19,
23.\] says: \"A rich man will hardly enter the kingdom of heaven.\"
Therefore, the prophet indicates that Christ died like a rebel and
deceiver. Since such a death is foretold by the prophets, this is a
certain proof that our Christ is the true Messiah.

**Although he has not wronged anyone 2c.**

This saying was quoted by Peter 1 Petr.

3, 18. Christ bore sins and yet did none, but took them upon Himself
from us. Therefore he now excuses Chri

stum and says that he was completely innocent, since he did not wrong
anyone either by his word or by his life. For this is the highest
innocence, when one has wronged no one, neither by word nor by deed.
Therefore he, the completely innocent, has been judged as the greatest
wrongdoer.

**V. 10. If he has given his life as a guilt offering, he will have seed
and live to the end.**

Therefore, we cannot atone for sins with our works, since Christ\'s
suffering is a suffering for our transgressions and sins. The posterity
of which he speaks is the Church. He says \[Vulg.\]: \"He will see the
seed\", he will have a kingdom and also children who are kings (regios
liberos).

And \"he shall live long\", that is, forever. It is a contrast: your
kings leave their children as successors behind them, they themselves do
not stay alive long, but Christ at the same time stays with his children
forever and reigns; he does not die like the kings of the world.

**And the LORD\'s nobility will go away by his hand.**

That is, he will have the Holy Spirit, through whom he will spread the
gospel. Furthermore, \"the Lord\'s excellency\" is that he has laid on
Christ the iniquities of all men.

**V.11. Because his soul has labored, he will see his pleasure and have
fullness.**

\"Work\" he calls here the suffering (calamitatem), the tribulation. His
work, he says, will be rewarded. For he will have a church that will
worship and preach him in pure faith. Furthermore, the word \"see\" in
Hebrew means to see with joy and pleasure, \"to see his delight in a
thing.\"

Saturabitur \[he will be satiated\], that is, he will be filled with all
goods, he will have power over the devil and over death. Now he
describes the way in which the happy progress of the kingdom shall take
place. Thus he will beget the descendants:

635

> ßZ4 L. xxiii, 154-156. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
> 1026-1030. 635

**And by his knowledge he, my servant the righteous, will make many
righteous, for he bears their sin.**

This is an excellent passage: \"By his knowledge he will make many
righteous,\" that is, that those whose sins Christ bears and those who
believe and know that their sins are borne by Christ are righteous. This
is a brief description of Christian righteousness, which consists in
nothing but knowing Christ. But what this is, no sophist understands.
For they think that knowledge is in the understanding, but righteousness
is in the will. Therefore they conclude: \"Therefore the knowledge of
Christ cannot be righteousness. But the prophet says the opposite,
namely, that Christ alone is righteous, and through his knowledge makes
others righteous also; consequently Christian righteousness is not
attained unless Christ is first known. Furthermore, Christ is not known
in any other way than through doctrine and the outward word. Therefore,
the gospel is, as it were, the vehicle through which Christ is brought
to us with his righteousness and all the gifts. Aristotle also says that
knowledge with the intellect (intellectivam) first requires perception
with the senses (sensitivam). Therefore, the word must first be heard
before we can believe it and become righteous.

Since he says that the knowledge of Christ makes one righteous, it
clearly follows that neither the rule of Franciscus nor that of Dominic
2c. does this, nor does the cap nor the mass; therefore no work of
one\'s own choosing can make one righteous, nor even the works of the
divine law with all other laws and works. The reason is this, because
they are not the knowledge or the knowledge of Christ. Therefore they
are in vain, even condemned, and fall into damnation, if they are done
with the delusion of attaining righteousness by them, as if they were a
service of God and good works. Thus the prophet absolutely condemns and
rejects all rules, all laws and all works. But who would dare to assert
this among the papists? And hence it is that Paul and Peter have so much
of this

Knowledge say: \"Grow in the knowledge of Jesus Christ\" 2c. \[2 Pet
3:18\], ye are not yet perfect, receive 2c. \[1 Cor. 15, 58. 1 Petr. 2,
2.\], and other such sayings.

Therefore, in order to be freed from death and sins, there is no other
way than to know Christ. This knowledge alone can set us free, and there
is no other consolation. Therefore those have erred who have taken this
knowledge in an active way. 1) For he says of the knowledge by which
Christ is known and known through preaching, namely, that Christ, the
Son of God, conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary,
suffered under Pontius Pilate, not because of any sin that he had
committed (for in him was the highest innocence), but because of the
sins of the whole world, which he took upon himself, that we, being
freed from sins, might live with him in everlasting righteousness.

Therefore, these words must not be read drowsily (oscitanter), but
because they are set with good care (vigilanter), they must be read and
observed by us with the greatest care, so that we may know well both
what this knowledge is and what it is set against, namely, against all
human actions, works and knowledge. For this is what Scripture is wont
to do; it almost always has the opposites in mind.

But it is a strange description of righteousness that it is the
knowledge of God, that the heart is only based on knowing Christ
crucified \[1 Cor. 2:2\], as Jeremiah also says \[Cap. 9:24\]: \"He who
wants to boast, let him boast that he knows and knows me\" 2c. Human
reason can neither find, nor, when it has found, grasp and understand
this righteousness, which in its essence is nothing else than the
knowledge of Christ, that is, the faith by which Christ is grasped in
the heart, that He has made Himself a ransom *(άντίλυτρον)* for us and
for

Our sins, as Paul says 1 Tim. 2, 6. The Word preaches and offers Christ
to all as the sacrifice for our sins.

1\) The meaning is: Not by a knowledge which we have (aetivs), but which
is given to us through preaching (xassivs), do we know Christ.

636 **L. XXIII, IS6-ISS.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 53, 11.
12. **W. VI, I030-KM.** 637

sins, but unless the Holy Spirit enlightens the hearts, no one can agree
with this word. But we agree with him when we take hold of the promise
that in his seed the Gentiles will be blessed \[Gal. 3:8\].

This, therefore, is the glory of a Christian, that he knows that his
righteousness is that he believes in this Christ, since the divine mercy
so decrees and promises. Thus the righteousness of Christians is a
righteousness only according to the imputation (reputative), not
according to the essence (formaliter). But this must be carefully
learned and inculcated in the sermons, so that we may know that we
cannot be justified by anything other than this knowledge, not by our
works, not by the holy ten commandments, not by other laws, not by
rights, not by judgments, not by punishments, however severe they may
be, which we either impose on ourselves voluntarily or which others
impose on us against our will. For all this the antithesis of
righteousness excludes, because it is not the knowledge of Christ.
Therefore, monasticism and Pharisaism, as well as other conditions in
life, do not make one righteous, because only the knowledge of Christ,
that Christ is the servant of God who bears our iniquity, makes one
righteous.

And with this description we must stop, so that we do not think that he
is a judge or an executioner. For a heart without faith and the Word
cannot judge God otherwise than that he is a severe judge. He is indeed
a judge, but in the future, that is, on the last day he will judge and
condemn the wicked, but to the righteous he will give eternal life. But
now \"the Lamb\" is preached, whose office it is to bear our sins. He
who knows this is full of wisdom and can judge all doctrines. But
especially he can take this from the fact that we do not bear our sins,
that a baptized Christian has no sins because he has Christ.

Likewise \[a Christian may infer from this\] that all the thoughts which
grieve the conscience are of the devil and blasphemous thoughts, because
Christ by his

Death has taken away from us the sins that Satan wants to heap upon us
again. Likewise, that all doctrines, even all living things, all things
taught everywhere concerning the forgiveness of sins apart from Christ,
are contrary to Christ and ungodly, and that by this one word all
orders, all classes seeking to attain righteousness, are destroyed, as
Paul says \[Rom. 9:31, 30\], \"The circumcision has not attained
righteousness, but the Gentiles have\" 2c.

This article must therefore be learned and practiced above all, which is
nevertheless treated extremely carelessly by many. But if someone does
not look at this passage thoroughly (penitus), he is like a man who
looks at his face in water (in unda), as Jacobus \[Cap. 1, 23. 24.),
because as soon as he leaves, the image disappears. Thus the gushing
spirits look, as it were, into a mirror, as long as they hear this
doctrine, but when they come into contestation, into other doctrines,
into other works, then they are overwhelmed and forget this place. For
the image has disappeared after they have gone away from the mirror;
therefore, it is something very great and difficult to persevere in this
knowledge.

**V.12. Therefore I will give him great multitude for a prey, and he
shall have the strong for a prey; because he hath given his life unto
death, and is counted like unto the transgressors, and hath borne many
sins, and hath interceded for the transgressors.**

He repeats as it were in a summa the same: because he has therefore
given away his soul to death, therefore I will give him a great
offspring. He also repeats the suffering and the benefit of suffering.
For this is the greatest thing, that this Christ may be recognized
against the delusion of the Jews, who expected him to be a king in the
flesh. But he says that he will die.

**He is counted equal to the malefactors 2c.**

Not only will he be mortal, but he will die in the most ignominious way,
such as the very worst knave, as if to say, If you would know your
Christ, take careful heed, for he will not die in

[**638** D- XXIII, 159 f. 441. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
IV34-IVS7. **639**]{.underline}

The prophet did not want to appear in glory, but as one who is to be
killed among the evildoers. But this admonition of the prophet was in
vain. For since Christ was killed, this text did not come to anyone\'s
mind. Therefore they still expect a glorious Christ, rather than that
they should believe in the one who was crucified.

**He has borne many sins.**

He also repeats the benefit of suffering. For he sees that this article
is the most difficult of all. He says: \"It is not the purpose of this
death that he himself should perish, but that others should be saved,
and that he should be sufficient for the promises. For neither could the
promises be fulfilled, nor we be saved, if he did not bear our sins.
\"He\", he says, not we.

**He asked for the wrongdoers.**

Here he praises the exceedingly great patience of Christ, that he
suffered with the greatest love

He had not cursed, had not thought of revenge, but had been inflamed
with a fierce fire of love, so that he had forgotten his suffering and
had even prayed for the evildoers, even for his crucifiers. But where
are the hearts that can consider this as it deserves? If we could do
this, we would be blessed. So there is nothing in Christ but an
exceedingly abundant dispensation (liberalitas) of mercy and forgiveness
of sins.

And this may be enough for the interpretation of this chapter, which
would be well worth reading often and also singing in hymns (publico
carmine), so that it becomes flesh and blood to us, as it were, through
diligent contemplation, so that we hear nothing but Christ, who
represents us, carries us, comforts us and loves us most ardently. The
wicked read this as if they were in a dream: Dream, but it wants to have
an attentive (vigilant) reader.

**D. Martin Luther\'s more extensive explanation of the fifty-third
chapter of Isaiah,\*)**

compiled by M. Georg Rörer.

Laid out in the Passion and Easter seasons 1544; printed 1550.

**Preface by D. Martin Luther.**

We want to praise God and our Lord Jesus Christ as long as we are
allowed to do so, and as long as we have time and are able to do so. For
the world does just the opposite, since it is completely full of
blasphemies and horrible aversions and denials of our Savior, so that
Christ is an exceedingly annoying object of our faith. That is why he is
and remains in his hidden and ugly form.

as the prophet says \[Cap. 52, 14\]. Therefore, faith must be nourished
and strengthened by constant study of the Scriptures and godly
contemplation, so that we do not lose or forsake this \"arm of the
Lord,\" because in it lies all our salvation. But why the Pope, the
Turks and the Jews do not believe in Christ, we will leave to the secret
counsel of God.

\*) Because of the title of the original edition, time determination,
location in the editions 2c. compare the note Col. 192. - Luther\'s
preface is found only in the Erlangen edition, 6X6K. ox \"x\"., bom.
XXIII, x\". 441 sq. In the Jena edition, not only the preface is missing
(as in the Wittenberg edition), but also the entire more extensive
explanation of the 53rd chapter.

[640 L. XXIII, 441-444. more extensive explanation of Isa. 53. w. VI,
1037-1044. 641]{.underline}

But we want to thank God with all our heart that he has called us to
this light of truth and the gospel.

However, I have decided to treat the fifty-third chapter at this time,
since it is primarily intended for us to consider the passion and
resurrection of Christ and to thank him for his unspeakable gift. It is
marvelous that Isaiah had so much light that he was able to portray the
mysteries of Christ so clearly and actually, even more precisely than
the evangelists, with the exception of Paul, who is the chosen
instrument. For otherwise almost the whole Scripture has no passage
equal to this fifty-third chapter. Isaiah calls this Messiah the Lord of
glory, the arm of the Lord, a king,

a priest, and yet the most miserable and despised\" man, that there
could be none more despised in the whole human race, and yet that he
must at the same time be worshipped as God in his majesty.

Isaiah sees all this beforehand and has no hesitation in claiming that
this arm of God is the second person of the Godhead and our High Priest,
at the same time true man, who, having become a sacrificial lamb, has
sufficed for our sins, redeemed us from the power of Satan and given us
eternal life. This is the main article of our faith and confession,
which Paul has dealt with abundantly.

Now, in these days of his suffering and in his memory, let us treat both
that Christ is God and man.

**Interpretation of the 53rd chapter of the prophet Isaiah**

by the venerable Father and Lord D. Martin Luther.

This whole fifty-third chapter does not speak of any nation or man, but
actually of Christ, the Head Himself. For by correct deduction it
clearly follows that we must become like the image of our Head.
Therefore, what the prophet speaks of the one person of Christ is also
spoken by \"the arm of the Lord,\" namely, the Lord Jesus, of his body,
that is, of the church. For he himself is the form according to which
the church must be formed.

2 And we must not invent various opinions here; everything must be drawn
to this one person of Christ. For there is no angel nor man who could in
truth be called \"the arm of the Lord,\" and of whom can be said that
which here the prophet prophesies of Christ. As when he says, \"He is
wounded for our iniquity\"; likewise, \"By his wounds we are healed.\"
Nor can it be said of the prophet himself. Therefore, \"the arm of the
Lord\" is the only and only essential Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ,
who as a true, independent and essential God is with God the Father in
eternity.

must be worshipped. First, he describes how he will show himself in his
office and what he will do in general.

Cap. 52, 13. **Behold, my servant will do wisely.**

3\. that is, this Messiah will be a servant of God the Father, or, as
the Greeks translated it, παίς. The Hebrew word Ebed means at times a
boy, at times a servant. Thus it is said of David Ps. 18:1, \"A psalm to
sing before, David\'s, the LORD\'s servant.\" But this servitude is not
a servitude of sin, or of the flesh, or of the body, but of the service
of the word, that Christ is sent for the service of the word. Therefore
Paul calls him \[Rom. 15, 8.\] \"a minister of the circumcision,\" that
is, a preacher and teacher of the Jewish people, to whom he was sent, as
had been promised before. But the Jews do not expect such a servant,
minister or teacher to rule without weapons, without riches, without
power, without sword, without carnal splendor. Therefore they do not
explain this passage of the Son of God, or of the poor man of the Lord,
the

642 L. XXIII, 444-446. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1044-1046. 643

Messiah, but of themselves, since they were now oppressed by the Romans,
corrupted, and handed over into Roman captivity. And this they do with a
terrible blasphemy, and show in no scripture their nonsense and
foolishness so much as in this fifty-third chapter.

4\. But Christ is and is called a servant of God, and for this reason
was sent by the Father; he took upon himself the office of a servant,
that is, the service of the word, so that he taught and governed the
chosen children of God, who believe, by the word of God alone; But God
always adds signs to it, so that it is a sign of the word, not of
rational philosophy, not of wisdom, not of power, not of weapons, but a
servitude and service that should be performed by Christ, to whom, as
the Lord, according to the divine will, the word is given, which neither
philosophy has, nor worldly rule, nor the household (in so far as they
are such). The Son of God alone has it in his church.

\(5\) Therefore he immediately begins to explain to himself what he
meant by this, since in the preceding 52nd chapter, v. 1, he said,
\"Arise, Zion; put on your strength,\" as if to say, \"I will speak of
the one servant, to whom no other is like or comparable, for he is the
Lord of glory and the arm of the Lord. And yet this same one will be a
servant; that is, I will speak of a teacher, of a preacher, who will
serve God in the ministry of preaching the Word; this I have sent, you
shall hear. \"He shall be my preacher and bishop,\" whom I have sent
with the word and for the service, to preach, to gather, to guide, and
to govern the church, not by arms, not by the sword, not by any
violence.

He will do wisely.

6\. it stands without limitation, absolute or noun, as the grammarians
(illi) speak. In Hebrew this means: my Messiah will be one who
understands without restriction (intellector absolute), who will be one
of the most important.

. 1) So the editions; in the Bible:

who acts wisely. It is not said or \[, as Daniel speaks of the
Antichrist Cap. 11, 37: He will not pay attention to women. That is why
Isaiah used the word XXX here (not XXX or XXX), which means to pay
attention, to care, to watch, which is actually \"to be wise\", that it
refers to the preaching ministry. He does not say: My servant will arm
himself, fight with the sword, carry philosophy and the wisdom of reason
to the sound, but his kingdom will consist in the word or in teaching;
he will not deal in his kingdom with any weapons, nor with carnal
wisdom, but all that he will do will be understanding, teaching, and in
short, the service of the word. Therefore you wait in vain for another
kingdom, which shall stand without the word and apart from your word in
worldly wisdom, power, and carnal weapons. The kingdom will not be such
a one, or the form of the kingdom will not be such a one, but when the
Messiah will come, he will walk poorly, not respecting the fleshly
things that the world holds so high, and will leave the splendor of this
world to kings and monarchs.

\(7\) This king\'s office will be to teach, and he will teach
understanding or wisdom, that is, he will do nothing in his office but
wisely, his office will be wisdom, the teaching of eternal life, how we
are to obtain forgiveness of sins, to be delivered from the power of
Satan, from death, and from all evils. He will \"walk in wisdom, and
will pretend to great wisdom, unknown to men,\" to instruct men, not
about this life, how this life is to be governed, and by what means it
is to be preserved; for this is already laid down in the first book of
Moses, chap. 1 and 2^2^ ). For this life has doctrines, laws, wise,
learned men, lawgivers, philosophers 2c. It is not necessary that Christ
first brings this teaching. Christ is another teacher and master; such a
teacher and master teacher, as the prophet Joel says Cap. 2, 23 \[?\]:
He has given you to be a teacher and master among the Gentiles, that is,
he will become a teacher of righteousness, of the

2\) In the editions: Osn. 12.

**644** D. XXIII, 446-448. more extensive explanation of Isa. 53. (52,
13.) W. VI, IV4S-I04S. **645**

salvation and eternal life, against sin, death, the devil and hell.

8\. Here you have recently the office of the person. The Messiah, the
Son of God, the arm of the Lord, will be a teacher, a servant of God in
teaching, \"who doeth wisely,\" nouns, absolute sohne restriction\],
that is, who doeth all things that men may understand and be wise; as it
is said in the second Psalm, v. 10: \"Be ye therefore wise, O ye
kings.\" Accordingly, the kingdom of Christ is in understanding and in
instructing. Therefore, let all who are wise, learned, and famous in the
world hear him, believe him, and yield to him.

\(9\) Moreover, Christ was also the most understanding in personal
matters or in worldly affairs. But the prophet speaks of wisdom in
office. Therefore, everything that Christ does serves to be recognized
that He is wise and that we also are made wise by Him, as it says
elsewhere in Isaiah \[Is. 54, 13\]: \"I will make all your children
learned by the Lord\", and Joh. 6, 1) 45: \"They will all be taught by
God\"; likewise elsewhere in Isaiah \[Cap. 50, 4\]: \"The Lord has given
me a learned tongue.\" This is what the prophet means when he says, \"My
servant will\" be wise or \"do wisely,\" as if to say, He will not
scatter gold or silver among the people, but doctrine, because he is a
teacher of the Gentiles. Whoever does not accept this king or looks for
another king and teacher in the flesh will be like the Jews who rejected
this despised servant. Therefore, they now have no understanding of this
servant. For it is decreed that the kingdom of the Messiah will be a
kingdom of word or teaching, not a kingdom in the flesh. Therefore,
whoever will not hear his teaching will not understand the mysteries of
his kingdom.

**And will be exalted and very highly exalted.**

10 But how does what follows agree: \"He shall be exalted and lifted up,
and he shall be very high,\" with the preceding? This seems to conflict
with each other. What should such a servant be able to do, who does not
have gold and

1\) In the issues: 5.

Who scatters silver among the people, who does not acquire weapons, who
does not gather armies, who does not subdue peoples, who does not rule
with power and wisdom? What should he be able to do? How can he be
exalted, exalted, and exalted? And yet the prophet says, \"He will be
exalted.\" I answer: By that word, by the teaching, and by the
understanding he will be exalted in the spirit. Paul explains this
exaltation in Eph. 4:9: \"That he hath ascended up to heaven, what is it
but that he went down first into the lowest parts of the earth?\" This
is how Christ was exalted.

\(11\) But of what use would this bodily exaltation be to us if that
ascension and exaltation were unknown to us, as it was to the Jews,
Turks and Papists? What does it help that Christ was exalted to the
right hand of the Father for his own person, although the personal
exaltation of Christ is a necessary prerequisite? For if this
understanding is not made known through the ministry of preaching, and
people do not understand and believe that Christ, after dying for our
sins, went down to hell, rose again from the dead on the third day, and
was seated and exalted at the right hand of God the Father, the
exaltation of his person is of no use to me, as it is of no use either
to the Papists or to the Turks, who blaspheme Christ and confess that
they are enemies of Christ, to whom Mahomet himself still grants some
honor by pretending that he stands at the right hand of God, but Christ
at the left, by which he indicates that he is alive. But the new Turk
calls himself an enemy of Christ; Mahomet praises him, but only as a
mere man.

Therefore, this exaltation does not only refer to the exaltation of His
person in particular, although this must be presupposed, but primarily
to the preaching, because the kingdom of Christ consists in teaching and
in the service of the word, by which God is exalted, as we have many
glorious testimonies of this in the Psalms, such as \[Ps. 34:4\]: \"Let
us exalt His name with one another\"; likewise \[Ps. 57:6\]: \"Exalt
Yourself, God, above the heavens\"; likewise: Your name is exalted in
all the earth \[Ps. 8:2\].

13\. therefore follows the personal increase

646 D- xxm, 448-450. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1049-1052.
647

the exaltation through the teaching that is in praise and glory, that
the exalted thing may also be praised. This thing is that he is risen.
But through the gospel it is preached to the whole world. There the
whole world praises and glorifies him, that he sits at the right hand of
the Father, in equal deity and power with him, although they do not see
him. For indeed we see him not; and yet we are glad 1) and exalt him by
the word and confession of faith, believing that he sitteth on the right
hand of the Father, that he might represent us.

14 Thus the exaltation also concerns us. As, 2 Thess. 2, 4, the apostle
thunders and flashes against the Antichrist, saying: \"He exalts himself
above all that is called God or worship.\" There Paul says that Christ
is exalted and equal to God; and yet the Pope is not only an adversary
of Christ, but he also exalts himself above Him; not really and in fact,
because above Christ, the Son of God, as also above the Father, nothing
can be exalted and lifted up, neither angel nor devil. Thus also Daniel
Cap. 11, 36. 37. speaks of the Antichrist: \"He will rise and rebel
against all that is God, and against the God of all gods he will speak
abominably, and he will not respect his fathers\' God\" 2c.

\(15\) This, then, is exaltation by doctrine, by confession, by faith,
that as he is indeed seated at the right hand of the Father Almighty, as
the same God with him, so nothing higher than Christ, who is exalted
above all, should sit in my heart; that is, I should believe that all
things are subject to him, that nothing is taught, heard, or said about
or apart from this Christ. Just as the pope, on the other hand, exalts
himself above Christ in all his decrees, preferring his teachings to the
teachings of Christ in the beginning, in the middle and at the end, when
he says: \"Because we are the head of the entire Catholic Church. These
words are a blasphemy against God, deprive Him of His honor, and are
against Christ, since the pope exalts himself above Him by these words,
because this honor belongs to Christ alone, namely, that He presides
over the whole Church.

1\) Erlanger: sxsnltamus; Wittenberger: sxaltamns. We have followed the
former reading.

That he is the head who rules over the whole body belongs to Christ
alone.

Thus the Antichrist has exalted himself above Christ by despising and
changing the commandments of Christ, making consciences free from them,
and insisting more on obedience to himself than obedience to Christ, 2)
even abrogating all the commandments of God. For thus he roars in all
his spiritual laws, as I have said, and adds: Whoever wants to evade
obedience to his laws, let him do it with danger to his soul. Thus he
condemns all souls redeemed with the blood of the Son of God, and says
that all will be lost who do not obey his commandments in all things.
This is exalting yourself and being equal to GOD. You \[shameful\]
Antichrist, I will not be condemned because I have not kept your
decrees. And yet we have believed that we sin when we touch the blessed
cup with our bare finger.

17 Likewise he says: We are the head of all churches; everything we say
must be kept. Thus he is a blasphemer in the beginning, in the middle
and in the end. For thus he concludes: No man is at liberty to
contradict our ordinance. Lofty words, as if one could not hope for
blessedness if only one did not keep a decree of the pope. Therefore, he
adds: \"He should know that he will incur the wrath of Almighty God.

If one wanted to reform the Decretals, the guts, the head and the tail
would have to be cut off. Certainly, godly jurists (discipuli juris) who
love Christ\'s teachings should be frightened when they read the
Decretals, because they are nothing but terrifying blasphemies and
exaltations of all that is called God.

19 Therefore the exaltation of Christ is twofold: one personal, by which
he himself is exalted and is our head; the other factual (realis). Both
are true. In his person he has been exalted and seated at the right hand
of the Father. The other, factual, is that he is believed to be such, as
such a one.

2\) Instead of rsMuäo, Wohl should be read urxsnllo. After that we have
translated.

648 **D- xxiii, 450-452.** more expansive explanation of Isa. 53. (52,
13.) **W. vi, 1052-1055.**

and we exalt him as such through the preaching and confession of faith.
And because of this second exaltation, the first has happened, because
his suffering, his resurrection, his glorification, his sitting at the
right hand of the Father, has this final purpose, that we recognize and
preach him as such. For his personal exaltation happened for this
reason, that we might recognize, preach, and believe him as such; that
we might confess him as such for our salvation, so that his teaching
might indicate this thing to us, and, after it has been thus indicated
to us and accepted by us, we might be saved by faith, as follows below
\[v.11.\]: \"By his knowledge he, my servant the righteous, shall make
many righteous.\" For for his own sake he was neither born, nor died,
nor rose again, but as St. Paul saith Rom. 4:25: \"He passed away for
our sins, and was raised again for our righteousness\"; as below \[v.
4\] also the prophet testifieth, \"He bare our sickness.\" In sum, the
exaltation and exaltation of Christ happened once in his person; but the
factual exaltation does not cease, but happens daily for eternity.

\(20\) And by this exaltation of Christ, by which we recognize, preach,
and confess him as the exalted one, he makes us blessed forever, and
then we shall be blessed by recognizing and seeing him. And even though
we will be drunk, full and full of this knowledge, we will never be full
of these heavenly things; we will rejoice and be amazed with the angels
for eternity, 1 Pet. 1, 7. ff.

\(21\) As I see it, the second exaltation is to be understood here
actually and primarily, which happens through us in the church, through
the service of the Word, in which Christ is exalted with us to our
eternal blessedness. We shall speak of the special or personal
exaltation below.

22\) I leave the difference of the three words which mean \"to exalt\"
to the Hebrews, since one cannot describe them clearly and actually. The
first rum \[XXX\] means high, exalted; from this Abraham has his name.

\[XXXX, that is\] a high father, and will be

But it is also used of the external exaltation, as Ps. 145, 1: \"I will
exalt you, my God, you King\", that means, I will praise you, I will
glorify you. Furthermore, it is used of the height of the mountains in
Isa. 2, 2. Isa. 2, 13. it is said, \"Above all the high cedars.\" In
this passage the prophet uses many words signifying a height; but almost
all these designations of height are figurative, and signify honor and
haughtiness, as in the 131st Psalm, v. 1. \[Vulg.\], \"My heart is not
lifted up,\" \"I do not go in high.\" A rich man is exalted, \"but it is
more glorious\" when someone is glorified with honors, namely, when the
other exaltation is added, that he is praised, extolled, and extolled by
men. So the difference may be (I will imagine it only in this way): the
Libanus is a mountain rum, that is, a high mountain; above this is a
hill, which is still higher; thirdly, I imagine a ceder, which has grown
high, or protrudes above the hill. This is how it is said of the Son of
God. But I leave this grammatical thing to the Hebrews.

23 Thus the prophet says in the person of God the Father that the
Messiah, the arm of the Lord, will be a very poor servant and very
lowly, having nothing but the word, and ruling only by preaching. There
is nothing glorious, nothing exalted to be seen here, and that is not to
be exalted, but to be weak and the most despised. For what kind of
teacher is he if he has nothing but the Word? Then, if he is meager and
bare, and has no lasting place, has not where to lay his head, and is
the least of men, 1 Cor. 4:9, and as he says in the 22nd Psalm, v. 7,
\"But I am a worm and not a man, a mockery of men and a despiser of the
people,\" what kind of exaltation is that?

24 Likewise, we are oppressed, we suffer persecution, we are killed, and
yet we are high, exalted and exalted in the eyes of the Lord, even in
the matter. Afterward he makes our name great and glorious, he exalts us
by the confession of faith, so that we may at least keep this
remembrance in mind.

1\) Erlanger: Its instead of: ista.

650 **xxm, 452-454. interpretations on the prophets. W. Vl, I055-1S58.**
651

far off descendants, that we have been true and faithful shepherds. What
were Peter and Paul in this life? \"A curse of the world and a
sweep-offering of all men\" \[1 Cor. 4:13.\], since there was nothing
less, nothing lower and more despised than they. So also was Christ
Himself; and yet, walking in this servant form, He is a King of kings,
judging and ruling all things. Thus he is exalted in the matter, and
afterwards by confession and preaching. Now the apostles are judges and
kings of the world, and exalted. For the sake of what? Because of the
word they taught, and they will remain exalted forever. There is no king
now, who, if given the choice, would not rather leave his crown, his
glory and power, and choose and keep Peter\'s glory before God. I am
talking about a Christian king, not about an Epicurer 2c. Yes, he would
certainly wish to sit at the footstool of his feet and serve him.

\(25\) Such is the kingdom of Christ; for he became a servant for our
sakes, taking on human nature, descending into the lowest parts of the
earth, and ascending again by deed, and afterward by confession, by
preaching, by praise, by blessing, by everlasting glory. Therefore,
first learn what kind of king he is, so that you may understand that his
kingdom is not in riches, in fleshly wisdom and power, or in any other
worldly thing, but it is a kingdom that is in the Word and in doctrine,
that is spiritual and eternal, that delivers us from the power of the
devil, from sin, from death and from all evils.

Cap. 52, 14. 15. **That many shall be offended against thee, because his
form is more ugly than other men\'s, and his countenance than the
children of men. But so shall he sprinkle many nations, that even kings
shall shut their mouths against him.**

\(26\) He has described this teacher and king so far as being very high
and exalted forever, ruling his kingdom through the word. As he has now
begun to be a teacher, so he also remains alone, as he described Matth.
23, 8.

says: \"You shall not be called masters, for One is your Master, Christ.
Now, therefore, he also describes the life of this servant, who should
do wisely, saying, \"Many will be angry with you.\" This is what the
prophet actually prophesied about the blindness of the Jews.

27\. for behold not only Christ\'s sufferings, but also his doings and
his miracles; is not all his walk in the highest lowliness, poverty, and
contempt? Therefore they did not recognize that he was their King or
Messiah. So the apostles did not believe that he would rule through the
word, but they hoped that he would restore the kingdom to Israel, Apost.
1, 6. 1, 6. They see glorious and great deeds, they hear his wonderful
actions, and yet they think that this is not the glory of his kingdom,
but hope that he will become a lord of the world, who will trample the
Romans under his feet and subdue all the Gentiles, but make them princes
in the world and lords over the riches of the whole world. How much less
did the Sadducees believe it, the fat Epicureans of the swine herd!
Therefore he says: \"Blessed is he who does not take offense at me\"
\[Matth. 11, 6\]. I poor despised worm, a mockery of the people and
contempt of the people \[Ps. 22, 7.\], have not, as I lay down my head,
as he says Matth. 8, 20. \"The foxes have pits\" 2c. What does this
mean? Are these the words of a king, that he has not where to lay his
head?

028 Therefore saith the prophet, Many that shall see thee, and hear
thee, when thou speakest, when thou doest, when thou sufferest, when
thou doest miracles, shall be offended at thee, and shall say, \"Well,
he shall not do it. Afterwards he is executed by a very ignominious
death, and hangs among the murderers, is buried; Annas, Caiphas triumph;
is this then called beginning a kingdom? The greatest part of the people
of Israel has stumbled at this stumbling block. Are you our king, and
have you no place to lay your head? Because of this they will be angry;
they will be \"horrified\", they will be ashamed of this king. This is
the vexation of this people.

29\. the prophet has a very emphatic

**652** xxm, 45t-t57. More extensive explanation of Isa. 53. (52, 14.
15.) W. vi, 1058-1061. **653**

Word used: Schamemu \[XXXX\]. For

Shamem means to be desolate, as also appears from the prophet Daniel
\[Cap. 9, 27.\]: 1) \"By the wings shall stand abominations of
desolation\"; likewise Isa. 1, 7.: \"Your land is desolate\"; likewise 1
Kings 9, 8.: \"All that pass by shall be dismayed\" Ps. 40, 16.: \"They
must be terrified in their shame\"; and Job 17, 8.: \"At this the
righteous shall see evil.\"

\(30\) The name comes from the fact that when one looks at the city of
Jerusalem, burned and desolate, he is amazed and shakes his head,
saying: \"Are you a city? Thus, the expression of our sensation comes
from the object. The one who looks at it gets a horror, shakes his head,
\"poses unthinking, 2) looks sour, wrinkles his nose and brow.\" For as
the thing is before the eyes, so is expressed the giving of those who
see it. As if he wanted to say: O Messiah, you will devastate many
because you are desolate; your life and your deeds will be such that
many will be angry and think that you are nothing less than the arm of
the Lord.

For to have a kingdom is as much as to have power, riches, cities,
countries, mighty men, and princes, and especially to have such a
kingdom as the kingdom of the Messiah promised in the Scriptures, who
would be a king over the whole world, as the Jews still expect today, as
they did then, to be lords, and to gather together all the gold, silver,
and treasure of the world, and all precious things, so that they may
then slay all the Gentiles, and reign alone. Since they did not see this
in Christ, even though he did glorious miracles, they shook their heads
and said, \"He will not do it.

\(32\) Therefore, just as he himself is the most wretched king in
outward appearance, that is, a desolate and forsaken king, so those who
look upon him are desolate, that is, they \"shamefully oppose\" him.
This is testified by the evangelical history, that this king, who did
wisely, was seen in the eyes of his people as a desolate king.

1\) In the Latin editions erroneously: \"lattd. 24, 15. Ouru vidsritis
adoinMationeui dssotationis.

2\) In the old editions: ungeberlich.

and had been nothing at all. \"They have just set themselves against him
as he set himself against the kingdom.\" For reason does not understand
that he who appears as a very poor and very wretched servant is a king.

33\. he appeared as a poor and afflicted one, not only in his suffering
but also in all his deeds, so that the wicked were not moved by his
miracles; only the godly admired them. And they were very few. Even with
the apostles, who were still carnally minded, they did little, only that
they had hope for a future reign and kingdom, as they say in Acts 1:6.
1, 6. \"Lord, will you restore the kingdom to Israel?\" Thus his so many
wounds, which were nevertheless so glorious, did nothing but hope for
bodily redemption from Roman servitude and for human rule. What should
the last yeasts of the Jews think of Christ? When, at the visible
presence of Christ, Caiaphas, Annas and other noble priests heard that
he performed miracles, they thought he was some poor prophet possessed
by the devil. For they were offended that he opposed the priests,
punished the nobles and rejected the worship of the people of God.
Therefore, they were certain that he was not of God, but a blasphemer
and a rebel; therefore, they were certain that he was not the Messiah.
Therefore the prophet says: This teacher will sit on high as the king of
an eternal kingdom, as an author of life and death. But because he
administers his kingdom in the form of a servant, which is nothing
compared to the kingdom of the flesh, many will be disturbed and angry,
and will frown, disguise their faces, and look at him with displeased
eyes; that is, they will be distressed, angry, and disguise their faces
against this doctrine and understanding, which promises nothing less
than a fleshly kingdom, splendor, power, and honor.

\(34\) Hitherto he hath dealt with the Jews. Many, he says, who see what
he does, how he does miracles, how he suffers, will say: This is not a
king, because they dream that the Messiah will be an earthly king.

654 L. xxm, 457-45S. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 1061-1064.
655

be. But why do they make such sour faces, that is, why do they get
angry? why is he so despised? \"Because,\" says the prophet, \"his form
is uglier than other people\'s.\" For those who want to be kings in the
world do not care to appear so; they do not throw away money, much less
live in misery, like Christ, who is not only despised himself, but also
calls his own to the same contempt of the world. \"There will be a
hideous disguise of countenances 1) and sour looks about this,\" so that
many will be angry. Therefore the prophet says: His form and his
appearance is uglier and more unshapely than other people.

35\) Furthermore, the prophet does not speak of the form of Christ
according to his person, because he was without blemish, of a very
healthy body, and had the very purest flesh; he was conceived without
sin and born of an untainted virgin; likewise it is said in Luc. 2, 52:
\"He increased in wisdom, age and grace with God and men\"; but the
prophet speaks of the worldly (politica) and royal form of a regent who
is to become an earthly king. These things are so inconsistent and
vexatious that nothing can be said about them; \"therefore many will
take offense at them.\"

Therefore, the kingdom of Christ is like the king himself. He does not
walk in royal form; there is no majesty, there is no ostentation or
power of a king, as is seen in others, but he walks as the least servant
of all servants, so that no more despised man has been seen in the world
than he.

37 Is it to be exalted, to do wisely, to have happy progress, as the
45th Psalm, v. 5, speaks? But as the Scripture says: From the mouth of
young children and infants he prepares his kingdom 2c., 2) Ps. 8, 3.
And: \"You made him lack a little time of angels\" \[Hebr. 2, 7.\], that
is, he was forsaken by God before all, as the word on the cross
testifies: \"My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\" \[Matth. 27,
46.\]

1\) Because of this translation of Uesolatio compare ? 32 at the
beginning, where Luther himself renders ässolantur by: \"oppose
shamefully\".

2\) In the editions: \"st ksut. 8.\" For this should probably be read:
\"?s. 8. Lt:\".

There is so much lack of his glory and kingdom that he is also abandoned
by God, not only by men. Who will believe that this one is a king? And
yet he will be very high, as this very 8th Psalm, v. 6. 7. testifies:
\"You will make him Lord over the work of your hands, with honor and
adornment you will crown him\"; but through understanding and faith in
the word.

38Therefore the prophet speaks of the trouble, when he says: Many will
make sour faces at you, and be angry, because your ugly appearance does
not agree with the kingdom; indeed, nothing rhymes less with the kingdom
than this your ugly appearance.

39\. But just as these many, who were vexed and sore seen, were cast
down, fell, and came not to the kingdom, to whom it was promised as
children, yet this servant of God, in this his form and ugly appearance,
shall by his death sprinkle many Gentiles; that is, instead of the Jews,
who shall be vexed at the figure of Christ\'s cross, not One people, but
many Gentiles shall be sprinkled, according to the saying: \"He came
into His own, but His own received Him not\" \[Joh. 1, 11.\]; likewise
Apost. 13:46: \"Ye count yourselves not worthy of eternal life: behold,
we turn unto the Gentiles.\" He loses the first part of the Jews; in
their place he gets not one nation, but many nations scattered
throughout the world. If you will not, the Gentiles will gladly accept
this king.

40 Thus, by a miraculous judgment of God, the word of Christ is
fulfilled: \"I have come into this world for judgment, that those who do
not see may see, and those who see may become blind\" \[John 9:39\]. The
Jews have the light, they hear, they see Christ; but because they are
offended at His miserable form, they become blind. The Gentiles are the
blind who, accepting the Word of God, have been enlightened and have
received Christ.

41 This is also written in Isa 6:10: Go, harden the heart of this
people. No matter how much the Jews are offended by this ugly and
annoying figure of Christ, it is through this very figure that he will
be

656 L- xxiii, 459-461. more expansive explanation of Isa. 53. (52, 14.
15.) W. vi, iv64-io67. 657

of the word and by the mouth of the young children, bring about,
establish, fortify and found his kingdom, and he will be exalted and be
the highest on the face of the whole earth. Thus Paul says 1 Cor. 1, 23.
24.: \"We preach Christ, an offence to the Jews\", and as Isaiah says,
Shamem, a forsaken one, whom they neither want to hear nor see, \"to the
Gentiles foolishness, but to you divine power and divine wisdom\". The
Jews, being angry, abhorred Christ; they became blind, deaf and
dull-witted people from seeing, although they heard and saw him
presently. So it is with the Jews today; however, by the very manner in
which many Jews are offended, he will sprinkle many Gentiles.

\(42\) It is a Hebrew expression in the word \"sprinkle,\" which is
frequently used in the Law of Moses, and is taken from the procedure
(ritu) of atonement and burnt offerings; as, sprinkling with blood, with
water, likewise the scattering of ashes on the head in mourning. In the
Law and Levitical customs, the sprinkling was used in two ways, namely
with blood and with the cleansing water, which we call holy water. For
the priest went into the temple, took of the blood, and sprinkled it
before the tabernacle of the congregation \[Deut. 1:3, 5\]. Moses dipped
purple wool into the blood and sprinkled the book \[Hebr. 9, 19.j, 2
Mos. 24, 8\]. Similarly, the blood of goats and bulls is often mentioned
in the law. This is a legal sprinkling, which the priests used before
the bodily sanctification; afterwards, those who had been cleansed were
also sprinkled with blood. Therefore, the use of this sprinkling was for
killing and purification and for the bodily forgiveness of sins.

43 This word is used here by the prophet and applies it to the true
sprinkling of Christ, as Peter interprets it in his first epistle, Cap.
1, 1. 2: The Gentiles who are scattered to and fro in the world have
been called \"to obedience and sprinkling of the blood of JEsu Christ\";
and Heb. 12, 22. 24.: You have come to Mount Zion, and to the blood of
the sprinkling of JEsu Christ, which speaks better than that of Abel.
For the blood

Abel\'s cries for vengeance, but the blood of JEsu Christ sprinkled upon
us for forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

44 This sprinkling is done through the ministry of preaching. The finger
is dipped into the blood of Jesus Christ, and this is sprinkled by means
of the mouth on the Gentiles who are scattered throughout the world, in
this way: Believe in Christ, who was crucified and raised from death,
for your sin and righteousness, and your sins will be forgiven you, as
it is said in 1 John 1:7: \"The blood of JEsu Christ makes us clean from
all sin.\" So the Spirit by the mouth of babes sprinkles the Gentiles,
and they that are sprinkled are sanctified by the remission of sins, and
their sin begins to be cleansed by this blood wherewith they are
sprinkled, that is, by this word of his blood, which is cast upon us,
that we should hear it, and believe it, and so be cleansed; which is the
merit of Christ. For the mouth of unspeaking children doth not these
great things, that it should establish the kingdom of life and
righteousness, and destroy sin and death; but the power of Christ, which
purchased these things by his blood; which certainly is no small ransom,
being shed for our sins, and sprinkled on us by the Holy Ghost through
the word.

45\. In the same way as the Jews XXXX, get angry, show their disgust by
sour faces; \"lock themselves up, turn their noses and foreheads\"
against the present Christ, who appears in an angry form, dies, is
crucified, and no form nor beauty is seen in him: In the same way, I
say, he will bring it about that many Gentiles will be sprinkled, who
will let this sprinkling happen to them, and will accept the word, which
they have never heard, with joy, according to the saying Isa. 65:1: \"I
am sought by those who did not ask for me\"; and Cap. 52:15: \"To those
who have not been told about it, they will see it with joy.\" \"Thus the
Jews\' mouths are well smelled and better applied.\" For thus the
kingdom of Christ is transferred to the Gentiles, who without their
worthiness, without their merits and just-

658 L. xxm, 461-463. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 1V67-IV7V.
659

The people of the world will come to this sprinkling, through which they
will be blessed, in accordance with the law.

\(46\) Yea, what is more, he shall sprinkle many nations, that kings
also shall submit themselves unto Christ; as if to say, So high and so
exalted shall be his kingdom, and by this sprinkling shall gain such a
progress, that even the heads of the nations, which are high in the
world, and, as David \[Ps. 89. 28. Vulg.\] speak, which is even higher
than the kings of the earth and any kingdoms of the world, will shut
their mouths, and will not boast of their powers or might at all, but
will say: We do not boast of our kingdoms, our righteousness, our
wisdom, or our power, because we are dust and ashes, but Christ is a
king and exalted above all.

47 What has the king done to you? By what weapons has he subdued you to
him? Where is his armor, his army, his might? Answer: The word which he
hath uttered by the mouth of the children, so that they willingly submit
to him of whom the Jews, to whom he was promised, would not that he
should reign over them, saying: Lord JEsu Christe, have mercy on us, I
am no king, yea, I am nothing at all, reckoned against thee. The Jews
want to subdue the kings of the earth; but the kings who accept the word
of Christ say: We do not boast of our crown or of our power, but we
boast of your dominion, because you alone are mighty, holy and the Most
High.

Thus Christ is exalted without worldly glory, without sword and weapons,
only by understanding and sprinkling of blood, so that the kings shut
their mouths against him, submit themselves and all that is theirs, and
lay it at the footstool of Christ.

Cap. 52, 15: **For those who are not told about it will see it with
pleasure, and those who have not heard about it will notice it.**

\(49\) Thus it is: those who have heard him (the Jews) have an
abhorrence of him. But this king and this servant who does wisely must
be exalted. \"The Jews

1\) and are against him; nor must he be exalted,\" because he is the
servant who does wisely. If you Jews will not accept him, since this
grace has been prefigured, promised and shown to you, I will make it so
that those to whom it has not been promised, who have not had the Word,
the patriarchs, the prophets, but have been deaf, blind and without a
word, will have him, hear him and see him with the highest joy of heart,
and say: We would gladly be the very least, only that we might be God\'s
people, and have a part in this King and in this servant who does
wisely.

50 Thus those accept his word to whom nothing has been proclaimed, and
who had no hope of this king or of his understanding and majesty. On the
other hand, the Jews dream that the kingdom of the Messiah will be in
the flesh, but the Gentiles hear this wise servant and obey him.
Therefore Paul says Apost. 13, 46: \"We turn to the Gentiles, because
you reject the word of salvation.

\(51\) So much for the opening words of this chapter. The Gentiles will
be understanding, will notice it and will not say: Shamemu \[they will
not be angry about it\], but will marvel at it. From the beginning of
the world the Jews have had the prophecies in which Christ was promised
to them; **they** have had the prophets, the apostles, the testimonies
of the patriarchs; and yet all this has not helped them. Nevertheless,
this King must be exalted among the Gentiles, who will receive him with
joy, praise and thanksgiving; they will see what **they have** not seen,
they will hear what they have not heard, and say: Who ever believed that
the Jews had so many testimonies of the patriarchs, the prophets and
promises, and yet would not accept this King? On the other hand, the
Gentiles will notice; they \"accept him with joy and from the heart\".

52 Thus it has been clearly foretold that Christ, because of the awe of
his cross

1\) In the Wittenberg: \"rüffeln\". This reading is possible: \"rüffeln
das Maul\" means: to pull the muzzle. Cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XX,
179. But \"rünzeln,\" which the Erlanger offers, is more likely here.
Cf. above § 45 at the beginning.

660 **L. XXIII, 463-465.** broader explanation of Isa. 53, 1. **W. VI,
1070-1072.** 661

with its kingdom be taken from the Jews and given to the Gentiles, who
have not heard of the promises and of Christ. So also Christ says Matth.
21, 43: \"The kingdom of God will be taken from you and given to the
Gentiles who bear its fruits.

Cap. 53, 1. **But who believes our preaching? and to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed?**

The prophet is actually talking about the unbelief and rebelliousness of
the Jews, that they did not want to accept their Messiah, as the
Scripture says: \"He came into his own, but his own did not receive
him\" \[John 1:11\]. \"Who believes our preaching?\" (auditui nostro),
he says, that is, our speech, our preaching, or our evangelical
preaching? For the Gospel is a rumor or speech heard with ears. If this
shall come to ears (audificatio), that Christ, the very least person,
has done nothing in his whole life that brings honor and dignity with
it: O, what a great vexation this will be, how it will find no credence
at all \[that this little person is the Messiah\]! 1) and yet he says:
He will be exalted and high, that is, he will be heard, although his
power and glory will not be seen.

54 Furthermore, although the Jews cannot deny that the prophet speaks of
Christ, the newer ones make a mockery of it, and fall into all sorts of
vain and unruly opinions. One invents this, another something else; most
understand it of the people themselves, or of the \"servants of the
Lord\" as a collective name \[for the people of Israel\]. But the
prophet must necessarily speak only of One Person, as we shall see
clearly. Some things can be falsified, but not everything.

The \"arm of the Lord\" is revealed through the prophets. And this is
one of the passages, and a common saying of Scripture, that the Son of
God is everywhere so called the arm of the

1\) Added by us for easier understanding.

The arm of the Lord is called the Lord. \"The arm of the Lord will
rule\" \[Is. 40, 10.\], this cannot be understood collectively by the
whole people of Israel; this is certainly not the arm of the Lord. But,
they say, we do not speak of Messiah, but of Moses, that it may mean as
much as: Which of the Gentiles believes our law, and to whom is the arm
revealed by which we were brought out of Egypt? But we see that the
prophet speaks of a person who is held in low esteem, despised and
rejected, and who will nevertheless sprinkle the nations, namely those
\"to whom nothing has been proclaimed\". \"All things proceed in one
sequence and in one connection.\" And to this he appends this: Who among
them will believe it? Who will hear this audible arm of the Lord
preached and revealed?

For as much as he has been revealed and preached, they will not believe,
just as the sun, when it strikes the eyes of a blind man, so that he
also feels its warmth, and it shines to all, yet falls on a blind man as
on a wall, which it nevertheless cannot penetrate. This is what Panlus
says 2 Cor. 4:4: \"The god of this world hath blinded the hearts of
unbelievers,\" 2c.; and Isa. 6:10: \"harden the heart of this people,
that they see not with seeing eyes.\" This is exactly what is happening
to the papists today; although the light of the gospel and the truth of
the divine word is now so clearly presented that all women and children
understand it, they are nevertheless completely suffocated in darkness,
in delusions and astonishments. This is what Scripture calls being
hardened and blinded, so that they do not see the radiance of the light
of the Gospel.

This arm of the Lord is sufficiently revealed and made known through the
ministry of preaching, but because of unbelief it is not respected. This
servant of God, whom Isaiah calls \"my servant\" 2), is \"the arm of the
Lord\".

58\. Connect these two: the arm of the Lord is the servant of God.
Because this does not penetrate into the hearts of the Jews, who

2\) It seems to us that srit is too much. This is confirmed by the
following sentence.

662 L. XXIII, 465-467. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1072-1075. 663

They boast arrogantly against us. You Christians, they say, say that
your Messiah is the true God, but Isaiah calls him a servant. What kind
of Messiah is this? Yes, you claim that the true GOtt, the Creator of
heaven and earth, is a servant of GOtt, cursed by GOtt, beaten and
martyred by GOtt, yes, crucified. If he is GOD, he cannot be a servant.
If he is a servant, he cannot be GOD, especially a servant who is so
despised and rejected even in the lowest hell. This one created the
angels and everything. Can he die and go to hell, as you teach and
believe? 1)

\(59\) How the Jews do not allow themselves to be guided and corrected
in this passage; they think they have the most certain truth. But we
have the command: \"Search the Scriptures, for it is they that testify
of me,\" John 5:39. Both are true: He is true God, the arm of the Lord,
and yet also the most miserable servant, because the Messiah is from the
seed of David, Jacob and Abraham. But he cannot be the descendant or
seed of David unless he is born of the seed and flesh. It is certainly
written that he is the seed of David, Abraham, Matth. 1, 1. and Rom. 1,
3. 4.: \"Who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh, and
powerfully proved to be a son of God according to the Spirit.\" So he is
called the seed of David, and yet also a son of God. He is the Son of
David in weakness and lowliness of the flesh, but the Son of God in
power, and so he is made manifest by the Holy Spirit after his
resurrection.

This crucified son of David and the wretched seed is the arm of the
Lord, of whom the prophet has predicted until now that he would be the
most despised. This has been predicted by all the prophets in very clear
words, but it has lacked anyone to declare it; this has had to be done
and said by the Holy Spirit. These words were understood by very few in
the Old Testament, as it were in secret; afterwards it was explained
very abundantly at the feast of Pentecost.

1\) Here follows in the Wittenberg edition the superscription: Von den
beiden Naturen in Christo.

by the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, as the fishermen spoke in many
tongues and proclaimed the great deeds of God 2c.

61\. Therefore it is a wonderful expression that he is the arm of the
Lord and also his servant at the same time; that is, the Son of God, the
Messiah, is high and lifted up, not only on the cross from the earth,
but also seated at the right hand of God, the eternal Father, so that he
himself is the arm of the Lord and the right hand of God, through whom
God has done and still does all things mightily, through whom he brought
the children of Israel out of Egypt and fed the Israelites with heavenly
bread in the wilderness for forty years.

\(62\) This is the wisdom of Christians who have the Holy Spirit, that
they believe this incredible thing, that the same wretched Son of David
is also the glorious King and God on high, that he is the Messiah who
hangs on the cross and dies, and is subjected to all devils, even that
he is the most despised and unworthy. Among all the sins of the world,
there is none that has not become his own sin, which he does not take
upon himself and bear: and yet he who bears all sins is the true arm of
God, and the glorious God, highly praised forever.

How could the Jews understand this? They are offended by the union of
natures. That is brought to hearing (est audibile). which is accepted in
faith; to human reason it is impossible to believe. For how can he be a
servant, and, as we sing: a hero of twofold nature, 2) who in One Person
has two natures? This must be diligently inculcated and believed when
the Scriptures are opened. Otherwise, no one would think that he could
ever penetrate into the inner and secret of the Scriptures without this
arm of the Lord, the God who became flesh.

64 Now that this is established, that the Son of God and the Son of
David are one, not two sons, all Scripture is open, because it speaks
only of one. Therefore, inasmuch as he is the true Son of David
according to

2\) Latin: OiMs sudstantias Mrriinus. In our St. Louis Hymnal also No.
23, verse 3: \"The well-turned hero.\"

**664** L. XXIII, 467-469. extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 1. W. VI,
I07S-I677. **665**

of this assumed nature, his whole person is called a servant. The
natures\^ must not be torn asunder, as Nestorius has made much ado in
this way. The Jews, he says, crucified not the Son of GOD, but the Son
of Mary. Thus they wished to honor and glorify the glorious person of
the Son of GOD, that they might not subject the same to the cross and
suffering.

\(65\) But this is making two persons, which is ungodly and heretical.
For the person of the Son of God and the Son of David must not be
divided and torn apart, but we are to believe and confess that these two
natures are One Son, because they are now united by the personal union;
since at the Council of Chalcedon this was quite rightly decided, that
Mary should be called *Θεο- τόχος*? that is, a mother who gives birth to
God; not a mother of the Son of David, in such a way that God is
excluded, but *Θεοτόχο*ζ, a God-bearer.

But the Jews object: How can he be born of God? I answer: The angel
foretold it, and so it happened. Therefore, the Jews did not crucify the
Son of David, but by crucifying the Son of Mary, they also crucified the
Son of God. Therefore, He is truly only One Son, because He is only One
Person, as the angel Luc. 1, 35. says: \"What is born of you (a woman,
namely a virgin) will be called the Son of God.\" It will indeed be your
son; for he will be born of you; you will conceive him in your womb and
give birth to him; but this same your son, or this same that is born of
you, will be called the Son of the Most High. Thus it is said in 1 Cor.
2:8, \"If they had known the Lord of glory, they would not have
crucified him.\" Paul clearly says that not only the Son of Mary or
David was crucified, but the Lord of glory, that is the glorious Lord.
And Hebr. 6, 6. says: \"Who crucify the Son of God.\"

1\) Erlanger: psrsonas instead of: naturas.

Therefore, let us beware of the insane teachings of the Nestorians and
the followers of Schwenkfeld, who tear the person apart and make two
sons, and let us hold that there are not two sons, but One Son. Just the
son whom the mother calls her son, God the Father calls his son, also
according to his nature, and Mary is the mother of the son of God. 2)
Therefore one should reject the error of Nestorius and others. 3)

68 Furthermore, the Fathers of the Church called this the communication
of attributes, that each of the two natures communicates its attributes
to the person who is the Son of God. The human nature communicates to
the person who is the Son of God, and the divine nature communicates to
the one who is the Son of Mary. What was encountered by the one who is
the Son of God is said to have been encountered by the Son of the
Virgin, and vice versa. So, Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of the Virgin,
and at the same time the Son of God in the unity of the person, that is,
through the united union (una unione) of the two natures, so that one
may rightly say: This man created the stars; God whimpers in the cradle;
and the man, the creator and governor of the angels, who sucks the
breasts of the mother, who created everything, lies in the manger.

Thus the Holy Spirit has preserved the Church in this article, which is
the most noble in our religion; as is beautifully said in the eighth
Psalm, v. 5: \"What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the child
of man that thou art mindful of him? There you hear the mother, the
virgin, the Son of David; likewise his suffering, his cross: You left
him a little while, \[Ps. 8, 6.\] that is, he was left by God; not that
the natures were separated, and that the divine nature left the human,
but it always remained united with the same; but in his suffering he was
left by the divine help and power. And yet it follows immediately

2\) vsi is in the Wittenberger, but is missing in the Erlanger.

3\> Here follows in the Wittenberg the superscription: Von der
Mittheilung der Eigenschaften.

666 L. xxm. 469-471. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. E-ioso. 667

Then \[Ps. 8:6, 7\], \"But with honors and ornaments you will crown him.
Thou wilt make him lord over the work of thy hands; all things thou hast
put under his feet.\" As if to say, Who has heard such things? And yet
Isaiah says, \"Who believes our preaching?\" O how wonderful is your
name, JEsu Christe! Nothing more wonderful can ever be conceived than
that you have been so forsaken by God, and yet have been made King over
all.

But how can it be said that he was \"set\"? Because of the human nature,
which is in one person with the divine. Everything that is said of human
nature is also said of divine nature. For human nature has not been set
over all from eternity; but now it has been set over all because of the
divine nature and with the divine nature, which is set over all from
eternity. Thus sings the poet Juvencus:

Salve sancta Parens, enixa puerpera^1^ ) Regem, Qui coelum terramque
regit.

[\[Hail, holy mother, who gave birth to the king who rules heaven and
earth as a childbearer.\^]{.underline}

It is a quite incredible thing, which is presented only in the word;
otherwise no one understands and believes it, if he is not also inflamed
by the Holy Spirit in the heart to believe in this word. For reason
thinks nothing else than what Nestorius, Arius, Macedonius, and the Jews
have imagined.

Therefore, we have a Messiah who has been the most despised and
wretched, that no one has ever been humiliated, pushed around and
treated so deeply and in such a shameful way. For he is a servant of the
devil, of hell, of all sins, of the world; he must suffer them all as
persecutor, crucifier, death-slayer, and destroyer. How hardly can we
bear even the slightest injustice or inconvenience? We are badly
satisfied with being punished by the parents. But this one has suffered
severely all the evils of guilt and punishments, which he did not take
for his own sake.

1\) Erlanger: vusruin xuta instead of: pusrpsra in the Wittenberg. The
former reading violates the verse measure

For our sake he bore in his body the misfortunes of others, so that he
might take away death, sin, the accusation of conscience, and all our
misfortunes, so that we, redeemed in body and soul, might be free from
sin and death, and live for eternity as new men, righteous and holy.

73\. No Jew can grasp this, indeed, no human heart comprehends it, so
that the flesh is astonished at it, that it becomes completely a stone,
stiffens and hardens, that rather a demant can be softened, if one
considers, and it truly comes into the heart, that the glorious Son of
God, the Creator of all things, suffered, that He condescended so low
and was humbled, that no sin, no deed of shame, no sinner so lost, was
not served by the Son of God with His own body. \"Who believes this?\"
says Isaiah. The arm of the Lord will be revealed. But let us wait for
the Holy Spirit, who shall proclaim, explain, and expound this; who
shall give us power, and shall be strong that we believe it.

This sermon came to us through the mercy of God. In the papacy, the
words themselves have remained, but we have completely lost the teaching
and the use of this article. We worshipped the pope and the deceased
saints, and were content with the rules and our works. You now do not
know what the state of affairs was under the papacy; but these know it
who have suffered its tyranny, as I have.

Therefore, Christ is the highest king and the lowest servant, the most
despised God and the most despised man in one and the same person, so
that one can say with truth: This God had no form nor beauty. His form
was uglier than all other people. Who? you say, shall this be said of
God? surely God is never shapeless, but the most glorious; he alone is
the beauty, the adornment, the form, the unspeakable glory. According to
this, how can it be true? Here you must know that these two natures are
united in One Person, that One Christ, and not two. Just the

**668 L. XXIII, 471-473.** more extensive explanation of Is. 53, 1. **W.
VI, 1080-1083. 669**

The sharing of attributes unites these two natures into One Person, and
the two make One Son, not two Sons.

Muenster cites a Jew who mocks this passage of Isaiah and says: \"If the
Messiah is so ugly in form, why is it said of him elsewhere, Ps. 45:3,
\"You are the most beautiful of the children of men, blessed are your
lips\"? That is, you are the most eloquent, blessed in words. Why then
do you say here the opposite, that he is the most ugly, and not lovely
in words, but despised? that no one wants to hear him, and everyone
turns away his eyes and ears from him? It is true that this does not
rhyme with the Jews, who attack the holy Scriptures as swine, indeed,
for no wisdom of reason.

A blind Jew can never rhyme these two things, the highest God and the
lowest man, together. But with a Christian they rhyme together in this
way: There are two natures in Christo, the divine and the human, in the
same person. According to the divine nature he is the eternal glory of
the Father; but for a time he was the most wretched and ugly, but
afterwards he was exalted, exalted, and became the most glorious. And
for the sake of this divine nature he was exalted above all things, even
after his human nature, to the right hand of the Father, because this
human nature must accompany the divine, or rather be united with it as
in One Person, and cannot be torn away from it. Thus, through his
service, he became a servant and a sinner, in person and not in nature;
but because he became a servant of all sinners, that is why he is called
a sinner. And indeed he calls himself a sinner in the Psalms \[Ps. 51,
3. 6.\]: \"God, be merciful to me, against you I have sinned.\" \[Ps.
40, 13. \"My sins have taken hold of me.\" \[Ps. 69, 10.:\^ \"The
reproach of them that revile thee fall upon me.\"

He calls all the sins of the world his sin. How do they come upon you,
who were conceived by the Holy Spirit and born of the Virgin Mary
without sin, in whom is the fullness of grace?

How then, O Christ, do your iniquities overtake you? Listen to the
prophet Isaiah Cap. 43, 24: \"Thou hast made me labor in thy sins.\"
These are words of the Son of God in Isaiah \[Cap. 1, 11. ff. Jer. 6,
20.: \"Thou hast not burned incense unto me, thou hast not offered
sacrifices unto me, because I am not served with such things; I am in no
need of incense; as he also saith Ps. 50, 13. \"Thinkest thou that I
will eat oxen\'s flesh, or drink goats\' blood?\" Sacrifices and grain
offerings for sins are not pleasing to you, but you have opened my
ears 1) 2c., Ps. 40, 7. You have not served me, but I have served you.
How? In your sins. I have nothing from you; you have made for me the
work of the cross, of death, and of lowliness. In what? In your
misdeeds. \"I have had to sweat blood,\" which in my suffering flowed
out of my side, and from the wounds in my hands and feet, and all over
my body in the battle of death in the garden. And this you have done
through your sin. You could not have been redeemed and served me if you
had not been redeemed by my blood and sacrifice out of unspeakable love.
Therefore, for your sake, I have become a servant of sins.

79 What then did Moses do when he commanded to offer sacrifices to the
Lord your God? Of this, no doubt, Christ, after his resurrection, taught
the two disciples who went to Emmaus on one Easter day, and he also
explained it in detail to all the other disciples during the forty days.
But it must not be understood that the law was given so that you should
serve God through it, 2) but God gave the law and the Levitical
ceremonies for the sake of preserving the ministry of preaching, so that
it would be an exercise by which you would be kept in good discipline,
and that you could learn God\'s word, and that there would be a certain
people who would have the promise of God and keep it, and be a witness
of it until Christ. You needed an exercise

1\) In the editions: pkrkorakti, for which the Vulgate reads:
psrkseisti.

2\) It seems to us that instead of \[srvistls should be read:
\[srvirstis.. After that we have translated.

[670 L. XXIII, 473-475. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I083-I08S. 671]{.underline}

are given in discipline; but by this discipline you have not reconciled
the heavenly Father. Isaiah understood this very well, as he says Cap.
1, 11. \"What is the multitude of your sacrifices to me?\"

80\. But you commanded all these things through Moses? Behold the final
cause. The law was not given that ye might be justified by it, but that
the promises might abide with a certain people, who should wait for the
Messiah, and abide in obedience and discipline; not scattered, but in
one faith, looking for the future of Christ. You have troubled me with
your sins, so you must not dispute how he who is the Son of God can be a
servant. Your sin is the cause of this. For you do not serve him, but he
serves you and for your sake. You have not been able to reconcile him by
the law or by your works. Therefore be thankful, and since you are now
redeemed, serve him.

So Christ is true God and a servant, the least of all sinners. But how
is he a servant? According to humanity. Since the divine and human
natures are united into one person, and Christ is truly God and man, the
Son of God is also called our servant.

Therefore, I believe that this is well established in grammar, and comes
from God, that some words are called concreta, and some abstracta, since
one has hidden oneself in endless disputes about concreta and abstracta;
and I believe that one can never determine, even in philosophy and
created things, whether something is an abstractum. When I say: albedo
\[whiteness\], I am in fact not calling anything white, or an object
(subjectum), but whiteness (albedo) separates the object (subjectum),
which then unites, and unites the thing that is white, from the object
(subjecto) and the separated (separato) or abstracto. Thus I say
rightly: The Godhead does not suffer; mankind does not create. Here I
speak of the abstracto and of the separated divinity. But one should not
do that, the abstracta,

are not to be set apart, otherwise our faith is false; but one must
believe in concreto: this man is GOtt 2c. Here the actual things
(propria) and what is attributed to them (attributa) remain right. The
humanity does not create, namely in so far as the humanity is set apart
or for itself alone, if we speak of the same alone. Thus again, the
Godhead does not die.

For this reason, one must be completely silent about the abstractum at
this point, because the belief teaches that here is not a separation
(abstractionem), but a combining (concretionem), a connection and union
of both natures. Therefore, one must speak of this thing as a concretum:
The Son of God receives all things, the Son of the Virgin receives
heaven and earth; the Son of God dies and suffers, the Son of the Virgin
dies and suffers. Thus speaks the Scripture, which must be carefully
observed, as in this place it is said that the servant of GOD is exalted
2c. For the \[human\] nature, taken separately, is a servant. But the
same is joined to the divine nature, therefore the very same person is
called the Son of God and God equal in human nature; not in and of
itself or separately, but in the union (concretione) of which all is
said. Everything that can be said of the divine nature is also said in
concreto of the other, namely of that which is united into one and the
same person.

Even the holy Scriptures speak thus, not we, because the arm of the Lord
is called the Son of God; but because he is united with human nature, it
is rightly said that he goes up, that he dies, that he suffers, 2c.,
because of this union. This must be diligently observed everywhere in
the prophets, where the Scripture speaks of Christ as of a man par
excellence, attaching to him all that is human, human suffering, and all
that can be said of this nature, even of sin (but not according to his
person, because in the same sin has no place), not according to
abstraction, but according to concretion.

Therefore, the question of Nestorius is foolish and ridiculous: How can
GOD be

**672 L. XXIII, 47S-477.** extensive explanation of Is. 53, 1. 2. W.
**VI, 1086-1089. 673**

be born? He freely admits in clear words that Christ is the Son of God,
saying: God is not Bitris, that is, born twice, He does not have two
majesties, but He is born once. But we say: Christ is born of a virgin;
but God cannot be born.

86\. Thus his Diaconus cried out before the people: You judge did not
crucify the Son of GOD, because he could not be crucified. The people
were dismayed by this new speech, since they had hitherto heard their
bishops teach from the Scriptures \[that the Son of GOD had been
crucified, according to\] 1) 1 Cor. 2:8: \"So they would not have
crucified the LORD of glory.\" Nestorius followed this Diaconus. But
against him the Synod of Chalcedon decided, as we have said above 65\],
that the Virgin Mary could be called with truth *Θεοτόκον*, as one also
read in the scribes who had lived before, because she did not give birth
to a separate human being, gl\'eich as if she had for herself especially
a son, and God also for himself his son; but she gave birth in time to
the very one whom God had begotten from eternity. Therefore, he has two
births, and he is Bitris \[born twice\], in that he has his birth
especially from the Father, and also his birth from the Mother, and yet
he is one and the same Son.

Therefore, the Virgin Mary is not only the mother of Christ, as
Nestorius admits, adorning his venom with this word, but of the Son of
God, who is the same one who suffered, was crucified and died, as the
angel says Luc. 1, 35: \"That which is born of thee shall be called the
Son of God.\"

I say this to strengthen our faith against the deception of Satan.
Nestorius makes two persons, two sons: one born of the Virgin, the other
born of God, since he says: You did not crucify the Son of God, but the
Son of the Virgin. This we cannot suffer; but we teach the concretion
and union into the same person and sonship (concretionem et unio-

1\) Added by us. Cf. § 66 at the end.

nem in eandem personam et filiationem), since he is the Son of the
Virgin and the Son of God the Father.

Therefore, everything that is said of the Son of God is also said of
man, or of human nature, in eonersto. So here the prophet combines both:
He is the arm of God, and God\'s Son; and yet he says: He has been
exalted, which is proper to human nature; and nevertheless this very
thing is also attributed to divine nature because of the union
(concretionem), because One arm is, not two, and one and the same
person.

**V. 2. for he shoots up before him like a rice 2c.**

90 The church fathers help us little here. Lyra explains it from the
holy virgin, who is not moistened or fertilized by man-seed. The thing
is true and certain, but it is not said in the right place. For we see
that the prophet is not speaking here of the birth of Christ according
to the flesh, which actually means to be born.

\(91\) Therefore, in this interpretation, let us keep as we began, that
Christ, though exalted in the form of God, yet did not show himself to
be such a Lord as he really was. He grew and shot up as another man; and
yet he was the King of kings, the One anointed with glory and majesty,
of whom all Scripture says that he was set Lord over all, Ps. 8:7: \"All
things thou hast put under his feet.\" Yea, he is also Lord over the
angels, Eph. 1, 21. f., because it is said in plain words, \"Thou hast
made him Lord over all the works of thy hands.\" \"So shall he also be
called\" according to human nature, but only according to the union of
both natures (secundum concretionem), that all angels also worship him,
bowing the knee to this Son of the Virgin, as he lies at her breast, and
must say, \"Thou art the Creator and Lord.

92 Therefore, I believe that Satan has betrayed and revealed himself
right in the beginning of Alkoran, since he writes right at the
beginning of this book: the devils have been cast into hell because they
have rejected Adam.

**674** L. XXIII, 477-479. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1089-1092. **675**

would not have wanted to worship. These are in truth words with which he
indicates to the devil through Mahomet that he had been in heaven, that
he had seen in the word of God and in the mirror of the Godhead that one
day the son of God would take on flesh and blood. Remembering this, he
began to persecute man immediately after his creation, because he saw
that this nature would one day be worshipped. This he refused to do,
because he was puffed up by too great hope. He saw that other angels
would gladly worship him, even though the Son of God would have assumed
a far lesser nature. But he did not want to humble himself before too
great pride, it seemed to him to be too inconsistent.

Therefore, it is right to say that human nature is worshipped, not in
abstracto, but in concreto, because it is One Person, so that one cannot
worship God without worshipping man. That is it that he says: This arm
\"shoots up\" according to the human nature.

94\. He calls this \"shooting up\" because of the assumed nature; but
not that he shoots up like our kings and the sons of princes. How
tenderly they are kept! With how strong food they are nourished! And
they shoot up like the young trees, they are splendidly raised, and the
world makes the greatest hope of them. But this king shoots up in the
biggest lowliness; he has nothing to eat and to drink, there is no care
and maintenance which would like to maintain this tree. The infinite
tree (infinita), which is supposed to be a lord of heaven and earth, is
a miserable boy, and is fed by the breasts of his mother; his parents
barely acquire enough with their hands to feed the body of this boy.
Later, when he is grown up, he is the most miserable. The women put
together a pittance so that he can sustain himself, he suffers hunger
and thirst 2c. Is this growing up or being raised to a kingdom? So the
future king should not have been raised, but should have been accustomed
gradually, so that the servants and the people bow the knee before him
2c.

95\. But how does this glorious and sublime servant spring up or come
forth? Like a dry and completely dead root, where the soil is dry and
leaking, where nothing can come forth, nothing can grow, just like a
rice in pure dryness and in drought does not grow, if it is not watered
and moistened. And such arid ground is actually signified by the word
Zijah \[XXX\], as, Ps. 107, 35.: \"When he made the dry again watery,
and in the arid land (terram Ziah) springs of water\"; that is, oerters
deficient in water, which are arid, as nothing can grow, as in barren,
sandy, and desolate or rocky oerters, as nothing grows forth for want of
moisture; as it is said in the Gospel of the seed that fell on the rock
2c. \[So it will be born and sprout, nothing in a place that is moist or
in a soil of which one could have good hope, \"since it would have a
semblance\", like the sons of kings, who soon go along in purple and
golden chains, have a large retinue, and hear it said of them, \"We have
a king or prince in whom great hope is to be placed. But what is
sprouting here?

This is how I understand it. For now he speaks of the servant who was to
be exalted, of the king (not of his personal birth from the virgin), and
nevertheless one sees no figure or hope for the kingdom. Since he was
still a newborn child, he was immediately sought out to be killed. He is
forced to go into misery and to flee before Herod.

97\. This is the grammatical mind. \"Like a rice.\" Jonek \[XXX\] is
ambiguous, it means both a rice and a child. And as the Germans have
many words from the Hebrew, so I consider that therefore we have these
words, \"Junger, Jung,\" which we also use of a Reis, \"a jung Reis.\"
The seventy interpreters have translated it: a child, because this word
is so much like that one, that where it does not have the circumstances

1\) It seems to us that of is displaced and that instead of: in loeo non
Uurniäo should be read: non in 1060 Uumitlo,

2\) In the Erlanger here is still a ts before \"Herod\": \"and to flee
from you, Herod\".

**676 v- xxiii, 479-481.** more expansive explanation of Isa. 53, 2.
**w. vi, 1092-1094. 677**

and it stands in particular, cannot be distinguished; only that here is
a picture of a child, and it is not an adjective, as with the Germans
the word \"jung\" is, but a noun, which has both meanings, as with us
the word \"Nagel\" is ambiguous, and means both a fingernail and a board
nail: so also the word Jonek means with the Hebrews both an infant or a
small child, and also a sapling (racemum), \"a young vine\". But Isaiah
has been diligent that inan should understand it of a rice, because he
adds, \"As a root out of dry ground.\"

**We saw him, but there was no figure that we liked.**

98\. I am not a Hebrew. That is what he said, a rice without soil and
moisture withers and dies; so also he who has no moisture, as it were,
is without form and hope; in this one everything is hopeless. This king
is found lying in a bad manger, he lives in misery in Egypt, he is
despised by his own; as it is said in John \[Cap. 10, 20.\], \"Why do
you listen to him? He is senseless.\" Likewise, \"He has the devil,\" he
is a Samaritan \[John 8:48\]; likewise, a sinner, a friend of publicans.
Afterwards he is caught, scourged and crucified by his own. This is in
truth, to be a rice without moisture and earth. This is the way of God.
Thus he plants even the most delicious rice, his King, the Son of God,
in the arid earth. Dear, what shall come out of it? what shall come out
of it other than what one has to hope from a completely barren earth?
But he does not speak of the form he has as a human being or as a human
person, for otherwise he was the most sinful, of a very good body
condition and of the most lively senses, but of the form in which he
presented himself from the time of his birth, and which was summed up in
his suffering, since he was made bloodthirsty and torn to pieces. But he
kept the shape of his body, so that one did not perceive anything
unusual (monstrosa) in it.

**He had no shape nor beauty.**

He does not present himself as a king should; he does not make the
slightest show; he does not deal with the noble courtiers, not with the
priests and high priests, but with the very lowest and cursed (as they
themselves speak Joh. 7, 49.) yeast of the people. He does not shine
with precious stones and gold, but he is wretched and poor, without
wealth and without any splendor; he is one of the most wretched of the
lowest yeast of the human race.

\(100\) Shall not this be grievous unto that people? It is against the
law: a leprous person should be avoided, like the rich man \[Luc. 16,
19. ff.\] avoided Lazarus; he did not allow him to come to his table, as
one who was rejected by God, because Moses had given laws that did not
only apply to lepers, but also to all livestock that had a defect, and
to the priests he forbids all defects, as much as can occur in a man\'s
body as in the livestock. All this is unclean, and one had to beware of
it according to the law. Consequently, he sins here in a manifold way;
and the vexation of his life and conduct becomes all the more severe,
since he does not abstain from the lepers, but allows himself to be
touched by the woman of blood and the sinner. So what kind of king do
they have? One who is not only wretched and despised, but who also
voluntarily defiles himself with all kinds of impurities, so that no
pagan could be more impure, even though he was the highest and most
beautiful priest.

This is what the prophet says: \"Truly you are a hidden God! \[What is
more hidden than this arm of the Lord? And this man is said to be that
very arm, and yet he is a weak and unclean man. These things are not
only contrary to reason and the reasoning of nature, but also contrary
to the law of Moses. They are contrary to nature, since rice does not
grow in the dry ground; now he adds the transgression of the law, that
he defiles himself, that he does not abstain from forbidden things, nor
from those he should abstain from, and does not keep the law of Moses,
breaking the Sabbath. Likewise, he will,

678 D. xxm. 461-483. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. ios4-iv
\"8. 679

that one should eat his flesh, \"makes it to be uneaten\"; and yet he
says that he shoots up and grows, although he is burdened with such an
ugly figure.

**V. 3. He was the most despised and unworthy, full of pain and
sickness.**

The prophet goes on to describe the servant of the Lord, who is the arm
of the Lord and the Son of God in power, saying that he was the most
despised and unworthy, full of pain and sickness. He was so despised
that people hid their faces from him, and we did not respect him. All
this still belongs to that figure, which is completely contrary to the
royal figure, by which he should have made himself great. This promised
king, such a great, such a high king, it does not rhyme with him that he
is the most despised and unworthy, and such that everyone should turn
his face away from him. And yet he should grow from this way and get a
kingdom, that one believes in this most despised and wretched man, even
in the one who was crucified afterwards. Therefore he said, \"Who
believes our preaching?\" The Jews, of course, could not understand it,
because they dreamed that he would be a worldly king; and we Christians,
too, can hardly believe it.

**V. 4. Truly he bore our sickness 2c.**

Matthew \[Cap. 8, 17\] does not understand this from the actual
suffering, since He shed His blood on the day He sacrificed Himself on
the cross, but from His whole life, since He had compassion on our
sicknesses and weaknesses.

104 Here he is in truth talking about the suffering, since he was also
wounded in the illness. I do not want to depart from Matthew, who
understands the preceding words, namely, \"he bore our sickness\" 2c.,
from his compassion. Although this is only a sympathy and not a true
suffering, this sympathy was undoubtedly a great, if not a whole part of
the suffering of Christ; as he says Ps. 88, 16 \[Vulg.\]: \"I am poor,
and in

toil from my youth.\" He has not been a sad or severe, a fierce or cruel
man; but he has been in toil and labor, in anguish and pain, at least of
the heart, all his life; he has often wept, sighed; all his life he has
been afflicted with the most sensitive pains. There is no doubt that
throughout his life he has been humbled, burdened with pain, and plagued
by our sicknesses. Our pains, oppression and burdens, which come from
the devil, have caused him a perpetual cross, day and night.

105 There are many examples of this in the Gospel, as Marc. 7, 32. ff.
When a dove that was mute was brought to him, he took it from the people
in particular and looked up to heaven, sighing and saying, \"Hephata,
that is, open up. Likewise Marc. 3, 21. f., when out of mercy and love
toward the poor and afflicted, he so labored that he neither ate nor
drank, they said, \"He shall come out of his senses,\" because they saw
that he had taken the sicknesses and miseries of the people so much to
heart that he could neither eat nor drink. And when he warned Judas at
the institution of Holy Communion, he was grieved in spirit \[John
13:21\]. Why? Because he had compassion on Judas, and because it grieved
him that he should perish. So, when he raised Lazarum and came to the
grave, Jesus was grieved within himself and wept, says the evangelist
\[Jn 11:35, 38\]. One must certainly not think that what this person
does and speaks is only for outward appearances. He is moved by mercy,
or as the evangelists say, σπλαχνίζεται \[the innermost part of his
bowels is moved\], he has compassion, he grieves\^with, he is afflicted
for the sake of our misery and pain, because he sees that we are so
terribly oppressed by the devil.

\(106\) The pagans also know about the movement of mercy, and it is not
without special vehemence. For the movement of mercy is as violent as
the movement of anger is. A mother runs

**680 xxm, 483-485.** expansive explanation of Isa. 53, 4. **w.** vi,
**ios8-nvo. 681**

in the middle of the fire when she sees her child in danger. So also
with the holy and pure man, namely the Son of God, there was such a
movement, that is, the most intense mercy. That is why he endured the
pains and miseries with compassion, because they lasted all the time of
his life until the grave, he did not lose this mercy on the cross, as
the Epistle to the Hebrews says, Cap. 5, 7: \"He offered up prayer with
tears.\" When he said, \"Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do\" \[Luc. 23:34\], this was the strongest sigh at which heaven
and earth trembled.

107\. So I explain this passage according to Matthew from compassion,
although it can also be understood from suffering, as the words
afterwards \[v. 11.\] explain: \"He bore their 1) sin.\" And this way of
speaking occurs frequently in the holy Scriptures.

The Jews falsify this text, because they understand this whole chapter
of the people as a whole (collective), but not in particular (individue)
of the One Man, the Savior of the human race. But observe every part,
and you will see that this is not the true and genuine understanding.
The Jews hope to be exalted and famous in the future, but it has not
happened yet, nor will it ever happen. For they are not the arm of the
Lord, neither is it a rice that springeth up out of dry ground. They are
despised and worthless, but that cannot be understood of them which the
prophet says here at the beginning of this passage \[v. 4\]: \"He bore
our sickness\"; likewise a little further on \[v. 9. Vulg.\]: \"He
committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth\" \[1 Pet. 2,
22.\]. Likewise \[v. 12.\]: \"He hath borne many sins, and prayed for
the workers of iniquity.\"

The devil has blasphemed our Lord Jesus Christ through the Jews by
falsifying the Scriptures. And this is also done by the scribes among
the Christians. Lyra names an Andrew who judaised (judaisavit), also
Thomas Aquinas; these declare

1\) Instead of tnarn in the editions, the Vulgate reads sorum.

this servant of the Lord so that he is the Jewish people. But the text
can only be understood by the One Person of the Messiah. Thus, the
Chaldean translation and the ancient rabbis agree with us.

Others invent two Christs, one the glorious, the other the abased. They
say that the one described here by Isaiah must be understood as the
humiliated one, who is secretly staying in the city of Rome and repents.
Others explain it of the whole people of the Jews as a whole
(collective), as it is now, as if it were the despised and unworthy
servant. But they lie quite impudently. Their princes, kings and popes
(papae) have been highly exalted; if not in royal honors, they have been
in greater dignity and honor than the true Christians, who suffer want
and endure persecution.

Therefore, this is nothing when they say: He (namely the Jewish people)
has borne our disease. They say that they did not deserve this
humiliation with their sins, because they are the righteous, holy people
loved by God. So why are they suffering? They are full of pain and
sickness, rejected and despised because they live among the Gentiles.
Are these not poisonous blasphemies, and the most poisonous bites of the
devil?

I was once present when a Jew was asked why they had to suffer so? He
answered: \"Because our ancestors admitted that Christ and the apostles
went to the temple and did not kill him immediately. Likewise, because
the Jews did not persecute Christ and the apostles enough. Likewise they
say: Because we live among ungodly people, we are defiled by your
deaths, who are worthy of hell and all kinds of death. This is how the
Jews explain this passage.

Lyra cites Rabbi Solomon and declares thus: When the Messiah will have
exalted the Jewish people and made them high, then the Gentiles will
say: Behold, how this people is exalted! Consequently, our sins have
made them so lowly until now. But this serves to confirm our faith and
doctrine. For if it were so, they in the land of Canaan would have

682 L. XXIII, 485-488. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I1V0-IIÜ3. 683

deserved this captivity, since they dwelt among idolaters, as they did
in Egypt. Likewise, we Christians dwell in the midst of devils and
Turks, so we would also say that this is the cause of our pain and
death, that we dwell among such. The wrath of God against this people is
terrible. But what a great case it is that even the most learned among
them teach like this!

Therefore, let us fear God and thank Him with all our heart for this
light, that we recognize Christ, the Son of God, as our Savior and
Redeemer, and let us ask God to preserve us in this knowledge of His
Son, so that we do not revile the Son of God with the Jews, Turks and
Papists, and fall into the wrath of God and into eternal torment.

**V. 5. But he is wounded for our iniquity, and bruised for our sin.**

Here the prophet begins to describe the true suffering of our Lord Jesus
Christ. But behold, how gloriously the prophet treats this matter in
this place. This arm of the Lord, he says, which shall be exalted,
against which even kings shall shut their mouths 2c., this God has not
only had compassion on us in the greatest pain, but has also suffered
for our transgressions, and has been crushed for our iniquities.

This is an extremely clear description, so that it is not surpassed by
any evangelist, except John. The three first evangelists describe only
the mere history. But Isaiah foretells the history, the cause, the
fruit, and the use of it. \"He is wounded.\" Matthew also tells this,
but Isaiah indicates the cause why he suffered, namely, because we have
sinned, and could not deliver ourselves from sin, death, and the power
of the devil 2c. What is the fruit of this? That we would be freed from
all our sins. The use is that we acknowledge Him as our Lord and Savior,
and believe in Him, and that by faith we receive the

have eternal life in his name \[John 20:31\]. Such great things he
states here so briefly and so clearly, describing, apart from
compassion, also his true suffering.

117\. But consider whether this is not a great humiliation, that the
Lord of angels was beaten and martyred and suffered? And this is the
most terrible thing, that he has borne God\'s wrath. For the fury of the
Jews, the devil and the Gentiles is nothing else in the eyes of the
wicked than God\'s instrument, with which God Himself has smitten and
punished Christ. Above the prophet called him \"the most despised\" and
unworthy 2c. But here we see that he was beaten and martyred by God;
therefore the Jews mocked him even more, since he was hanging on the
cross: \"If he is the Son of God, let him come down from the cross\"
\[Matth. 27, 40\]. For they had taken him for one who was utterly
rejected by God, because he was so miserably afflicted. This would not
have happened to him if he had not deserved these punishments himself.
For according to the law of Moses, he who hangs on the wood is
considered cursed by God \[Deut. 21:23\]. Therefore the Jews thought
thus: Christ has been crucified; consequently, he is a very great and
blasphemous deceiver. Likewise: he hangs on the cross; therefore he is
cursed, and we have done very right in crucifying him 2c.

Thus God, according to His marvelous counsel, has taken away the curse
of the whole law through His arm, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He
was a blessed and holy person, and not tainted with any sin, as Isaiah
says \[v. 9\]: \"He did no sin, neither was any deceit found in his
mouth.\" Consequently, neither the law nor death had any right to him.
But the cross and suffering were sanctified by his innocence. Thus He
nullified the whole law with His curse on Himself, and took away sin,
death and hell, swallowed them up and destroyed them, Col. 2, 14. 15.
But not only the Jews, but also the apostles did not know this so
wonderful counsel of God. But the prophet says here the

**684** A- xxiii, **488 f.** More extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 5.
W. vi, **1103-110\". 685**

The great things beforehand, that this king of honors has suffered, not
only according to the inner strength (intense) that it has hurt him
fiercely, but also according to the extension (extensive) that he loses
his good reputation that he is not the righteous son of God, but is
counted among the wrongdoers, who suffers so that his conscience
testifies to him the divine wrath.

This is truly something great: Christ 1) felt the wrath of God more than
I and you; and there is nothing pretended or illusory about this person.
He felt the wrath of God as if he was forsaken by God, and as if he was
suffering because God was angry with him. Therefore he cries, Ps. 22,
2.: \"My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\" and Ps. 8, 6.: \"You
will let him be forsaken by God for a little while.\" Certainly he felt
the wrath of God here, and more than any human being. Yes, he also felt
the punishment of hell, especially since his nature was very tender and
his conscience innocent; and if God does not help, then abandonment
follows, as he is abandoned here. Therefore, the devil exerted all his
powers on him, and there is no doubt that he gave him such thoughts:
Behold, you have had fellowship with adulterers, tax collectors and
sinners; you have been disobedient to the high priest 2c. For the devil
knows how to turn even the best works into sins. And he was with him in
the garden, sweating bloody sweat, and no doubt wounded his heart most
grievously. This is the most unworthy 2) and most shameful suffering,
that the most innocent should die for the sins of others, and not for
the sins of one man, but for the whole human race.

120\) This can hardly be believed (tantum), therefore the prophet says,
\"Who believes our preaching?\" Thou, Christe, wilt be a king and a
savior of men? I, says he \[Christ, Is. 49, 25., to man\], 3) will

1\) Erlanger: EUristuna instead of: EUristus.

2\) We have followed the reading of Wittenberg: vilissiina; Erlanger:
utilissima.

3\) Inserted by us. The old translator offers: \"I, saith Satan, will
make thee blessed.\" That Luther

help you. But \[interjects the devil\] listen, the one who does
something and the one who agrees with it, they get equal punishments.
You have dealt with sinners, but you have avoided dealing with the
saints and Pharisees and scribes. You have spoken against the law 2c.,
consequently you are unclean and condemned. In being forsaken the devil
knows how to make these things exceedingly great, that so great a person
should suffer such and such great things, and in every way so
dreadfully. He \[Christ\] has wished to exhaust all that there is but of
sins, of all kinds of death, of sicknesses, of misfortunes 2c.
Therefore, this cannot be sufficiently inculcated: the person is
infinite, consequently his doings and sufferings are also infinite.

121\. He has been beaten by God, not only with the outward reputation in
which he walked among the people who considered him the most despised
and unworthy, but this suffering of his also proves with a certain
reason that God hates him.

We would have felt these fiery darts forever if he had not extinguished
them in his heart with blood. Therefore the author of the epistle to the
Hebrews \[Cap. 4, 15\] says: \"We have a high priest who is tempted
everywhere\" 2c. No one can suffer what Christ suffered; no suffering is
so great in any saint that is not greater in Christ. For \"he is wounded
for our iniquity, and bruised for our sin\".

**The punishment is upon him that we may have peace, and by his wounds
we are healed.**

Peter states the right cause of the suffering of our Lord Jesus Christ
\[1 Pet 2:24\]. The cause is our sin; the fruit our peace and health.
For we had neither health nor peace, but from all death, from all sins,
from conscience, from the power of the devil, we were delivered through
Christ. All this is in

Is. 49, 25 is also evident from the passage Li-l. 6X6\^. opp., tom.
XXIII, p. 628, where almost the same words stand: LM, in\^nit, \[nivudo,
to which then Is. 49, 26. excludes itself.

6866 . XXIII, 489-492. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
II06-II09. 687

This person has been devoured. Here, peace and health are restored to
us, and nothing more is required of us than that we fall in faith.

\(124\) But here the repetition (tautologia) must be observed in the
prophet, for to say the same thing twice is quite common in the
Scriptures: \"The punishment is upon him, that we might have peace, and
by his wounds we are healed. He says the same thing twice with changed
words, that he is bruised, that he is wounded. \"The punishment\" and
\"the wounds\" are one and the same. But why does he do this and endure
this? \"That we might have peace.\" Why does he allow himself to be
wounded? \"That we might be healed.

He does not suffer for the sake of sins alone, as happens when an
innocent man is seized with other guilty men, and the others who are
guilty escape. He alone is punished, not because of his sins, because he
has done nothing, but because he has been seized among the other guilty
ones. However, the others do not escape from guilt, but if they are
caught, they are punished much more severely than this innocent man. But
Christ suffers so that others, namely us, may have peace and salvation.
The suffering of one who is taken among the guilty and led to death is
only a punishment (poena). But Christ\'s suffering, who was taken among
us sinners, is a completely different punishment (disciplina), which is
not only inflicted on him because of our sins, but also works peace for
us, and not only takes away the guilt of sins from us, but also obtains
and gives us peace and salvation. Now this is the real and most
distinguished power and effect of the passion of Christ, that we are
delivered from guilt and from an evil conscience, and have the peace of
a good and cheerful conscience, and that in such a way that it can no
longer trouble us.

The person 1) is eternal and infinite, and also a single drop of it
would have been enough to make the whole world blessed.

1\) In the Erlanger: psrgona yuiäsrn; in the Wittenberger HuläE is
rightly omitted.

For the worthiness of the person is so great and so inestimable that the
whole world cannot be compared to a single drop of blood; and yet, if
only a single drop were shed, the same would liberate the whole world.
For He is the Son of God; therefore it must be said: the wounds, the
punishment of the Son of God, not of a prophet, not of a patriarch, not
of an angel. The ransom is all too great) Christ \[st a rich redeemer:
fist blows, scourge blows, saliva and cheek strokes, he has endured the
multitude, yes, sadness and pain in the heart, so even that the blood
came out. This is an abundant ransom, and we have no cause to despair;
all things he suffers for our sin\'s sake, to the end that we might have
peace and salvation: \"By his wounds we are made whole,\" 1 Pet. 2:24.
Therefore, it might be so explained here, since \[in the Vulgate\] it is
said, chastening, or \"the chastisement of our peace,\" that is, by his
chastisement we have peace; \"by his wounds we are given health,\" that
is, blessedness. The evangelists do not speak of Christ\'s suffering in
this way, except Peter and Paul.

**V. 6. We all went astray like sheep, each looking to his own way; but
the Lord cast all our sin upon him.**

\(127\) Here the Jews show themselves shameful, who say that it must be
understood of the captive people, who were wounded because of our sin,
that is, the sin of the Gentiles. For they explain this passage thus: At
the time of the Messiah, when he will come and glorify his people, the
Jews, you Gentiles will say like this: Why do we humiliate this people
who are wounded because of our sin?

But hear what the prophet says: \"We all went astray.\" Now if I said,
as the eunuch did Apost. 8:34, \"Of whom speaketh the prophet?\" Of whom
speakest thou, when thou sayest, He is wounded for our iniquity?\" of
whom, I say, speakest thou? The Jews answer: Not of all, but of some
sinners; not of the people of the Jews, in whom, no doubt, are many
saints.

2\) Erlanger: rninis instead of: nimis.

**688** um. 492-494. more extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 6. W. VI,
1109-1111. **689**

are. But the prophet sufficiently testifies here that he speaks of all,
as elsewhere \[Rom. 3, 10. 23. Ps. 14, 3.\]: \"There is not one who is
righteous, not even one; they are all sinners.\" As if he wanted to say:
He does not speak of public sinners, of harlots, of publicans, but of
all saints, also in the people of God, which has God\'s word, which is
the true church, because no one is holy except Christ.

Thus the prophet includes in one word the whole human race, except the
Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, so that no one may boast of his
strength, righteousness and wisdom. All of them, as many as are of
Adam\'s seed, though they be called to holiness and to the kingdom of
heaven, yet have we all received grace for grace out of his abundance:
for the law was given by Moses, we know; but it wrought wrath and
hypocrisy: but grace and truth were given by Jesus Christ, John 1:16,
17. 1, 16. 17. The law was given, not only to keep us in check, but to
drive us to the Son of God, who is the arm of the Lord, smitten and full
of wounds. The law is not given for grace and truth. Although the law is
truth, holy, right and good, Rom. 7, 12, it does not give blessedness,
grace and peace; it does not take away our sin. Therefore Christ had to
be wounded, and to make peace to the conscience by his punishment,
Christ, I say, by his wounds took away the unrest of our conscience, our
unhappiness by his punishments, because we all went astray.

\(130\) Why then do the Jews boast that they have suffered for the sins
of others, when they cannot see their own sins, much less remove them?
They are blinded by the law and by righteousness; they think they are
keeping the law, but it is all vain and hypocrisy. There is no health,
no peace, no forgiveness of sins, except through the wounds of the
Lord\'s arm. We went astray, he says, like sheep, each one straying to
his own way. This is the characteristic of the sheep, as the Scriptures
indicate, Matt. 9:36: \"They were scattered like sheep,

who have no shepherds\"; and Ezek. 34, 5. 6.: My sheep are wounded and
scattered. The apostle Peter alludes to this when he explains this
passage \[1 Pet 2:25\]: \"You would have been like sheep scattered and
straying, but now you have been converted to the bishop of your souls.\"
We were.\] all like sheep, in that every one strayed to his own way. But
you say: The way is good. Listen to the first Psalm, where it says, v.
1: \"The way, the seat, the counsel of sinners.\" The way on the right
hand is good, but the way on the left hand is not good, because they
have all sinned, and gone astray in their ways; all are like scattered
sheep, which, when once they go astray, hear not the voice of a strange
shepherd. Whoever calls such a sheep that has been abandoned by its true
shepherd, it does not hear his voice; the more it is called, the more it
goes astray; but if it hears the true shepherd, it soon hears. 2) So we
all went astray, none of us had the way of salvation; as the 14th Psalm,
v. 2, 3, testifies: \"There is none righteous, there is none that doeth
good, not even one. They have all gone astray and become unrighteous\"
\[Rom. 3:10, 12\]. \"In their ways there is vain sorrow and heartache\"
\[Isa. 59:7, Rom. 3:16\]. This is our title apart from Christ.

For this reason, the pope, the Turk, the Jews, and all those who have
invented so many ways apart from Christ are worthy of constant hatred.
I, at least, have kept my religious rule with great diligence and zeal,
I have often been sick and almost fasted to death, I observed the essays
carefully, I had my own way for myself; so did other monks. 3) There was
a lack of the wounds of the Lord\'s arm; nothing was known of his
wounds, nothing of his punishment, that we might have peace; but we were
taught only that we should do enough by works, and so by a mere work (ex
opere operato), since it is somewhat meritorious (de congruo), 4) earn
the forgiveness of sins.

132\. is it not a frightening thing that

1\) Instead of erramiiZ probably eramus is to be read. After that we
have translated.

3\) In this sentence there are two commas in the Erlangen edition which
disturb the sense, behind voeat and before vsrnrn.

3s Erlanger: rnonaroNi instead of monnoNi.

4\) For this translation, see Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII,
1939; Vol. XIX, 1471, Thesis 33.

[690 L. XXIII, 494-496. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
IIII-I1I4. 691]{.underline}

Such things are taught publicly in the church of God? where only
Christ\'s voice should be heard, that no health, no peace, no taking
away of sin takes place, except by Christ\'s blows, wounds and
punishment. But this was entirely concealed, and meanwhile our
devotions, our works, our monasticism 2c. were presented. Of faith in
Christ, of the power and fruit of His suffering, of Holy Communion, of
baptism, nothing at all was taught. I, at least, tried with the greatest
zeal to become righteous by my own works; I did not eat, I did not
drink, I did not sleep; others did not have an evil conscience, they
were not plagued with such terrors; but I was afraid of the last day of
God\'s wrath, and of hell; I sought help everywhere, I called upon Mary,
St. Christopher. And the more I tried, the more I accumulated idolatry.
I could not see Christ, because the scholastics had taught me that we
had to hope for forgiveness of sins and beatitude through our works.
Then I lost the wounded Christ, and when I saw him, I was terrified of
his face.

You, then, who have not been in this terrible iron furnace, give thanks
to God and be grateful for this immensely great benefit; remain in
agreement with this most true and pure teaching. For the holy Scriptures
and the prophets agree with this, as Peter says, Apost. 10:43: \"All the
prophets testify of this, that through his name all who believe in him
shall receive forgiveness of sins.\"

This wise servant of God says: \"No man is righteous, but all are guilty
before God and worthy of condemnation; only through his wounds have we
been healed, and through his punishment do we attain salvation. We have
the law, but the law does not testify that we are on the right path, but
under the wrath of God and in the agony of sin. Moses has a heavy
language and a heavy tongue; he makes sinners and guilty; why? Not that
we should sin, but that we should take refuge in the Savior, who is
smitten with wounds, and in the Prince of Peace, who is

has suffered the punishment; 1) as Peter speaks \[1 Ep. 2, 25.\]: One
must turn to the bishop, who takes care of his army himself, who governs
us by the Holy Spirit in his word and sacraments, that we may be drawn
away from the here and there gathered, uncertain, harmful and infinite
ways, and remain on the right way. We have indeed had infinite ways; but
this, which has suffered punishment, that is, the right way, we have not
had. Why then do we boast that we can be justified by the law? For how
can we be justified by the law? Yes, the more we strove and strove, the
more we strayed, like a sheep that has strayed from its shepherd; the
more it is called, the more it is abandoned, and the further it strays.
New indulgences, new services, new devotions have always been sought.

\(135\) But wherever this wounded and beaten and punished man comes, the
heart becomes calm and at peace, saying, \"For my sake Christ was
punished and wounded, so that I might be holy and at peace.

**But the Lord cast all our sin upon him 2c.**

The prophet continues to explain the fruit of the suffering of the Son
of God, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But the word \"all\" must not
be taken collectively, as if only some had not gone astray, but
distributively, each one for his own person separately, in particular.
For he excepteth none but he that is in Christ. And the Lord, he says,
caused all our sin to fall upon him (concurrere). The word concurrere,
which is called paga \[XXX\] in Hebrew, actually means to shower with
something, to ask someone for another, as it is used by Abraham against
Ephron, Gen. 23, 8.

137 Thus Christ both bore our sins and pleaded with His Father on our
behalf, and truly became a curse for us, as Paul says \[Gal. 3:13\], in
order that we might be able to live in peace.

1\) Wittenberger: Niseiplinarum instead of: äisoiplinatuw.

692 **xxiii, 4S6-4S8.** More extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 6. **W.
vi, 1114-1117.** 693

that he redeemed us from the curse of the law. In order that the prophet
might express this all the more emphatically, he used the peculiar word
paga, which actually means both to throw something at someone and to ask
for someone. And the Chaldean translator, explaining this passage more
clearly, has given it thus: It hath pleased the LORD, for his sake, to
forgive us all our sins. Therefore, this Christ, the Son of God and the
Son of the Virgin Mary, is the only person who took our sins upon
himself and incurred the wrath of God because of our sins, and pleaded
with his Father on our behalf, and for whose sake the Father forgave our
sins and gave us the Holy Spirit and eternal life.

Therefore, we should take refuge in him and be certain that the Father
is reconciled to us through him. For all those who believe in Him are
completely free from sin and have eternal life, as John 1:29 says:
\"Behold, this is the Lamb of God who bears the sin of the world\";
likewise, v. 12: \"As many as received Him, to them He gave power to
become the children of God, who believe in His name\"; likewise, John
3:16, 17. 3, 16, 17: \"God so loved the world that He gave His only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but
have everlasting life\"; likewise, \"For God sent not His Son into the
world to judge the world, but that the world through Him might be
saved.\" Therefore, sin cannot harm him who believes, because he bears
all the sins of the whole world. He has left none at all that he has not
borne, overcome, and blotted out, unless because of my unbelief I did
not want to take it from me and have it blotted out. Thus he says John
16:8: \"The Holy Spirit will punish the world for sin.\" The Lord has
caused all our sins to fall on him; so it is sin from now on if one does
not believe in him. The Jews and all hypocrites want to be justified by
the law. But the gospel teaches that even if you have all the
righteousness of the law, which is impossible, you still remain
righteous unless you have faith.

in Christ is there, under sin and the wrath of God. If you do not
believe in Him, on whom all the sins of the whole world are cast, you do
not have life, as John 3:36 says: \"He who does not believe in Him will
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.\"

139\. God had set him to bear the attack of Satan, of death, of the Law,
of the whole world and the sins of all men. Sin killed him, but as one
who could not be killed; he was killed after human birth; and yet it is
said that the Son of God was truly killed. He could not be killed
because of that sting in the Gospel that He is the living God, as He
says: \"I live, and you also shall live\" \[John 14:19\]. Though I die
for you, yet I shall live by dying, because I am GOD and man. Death can
bite me and kill me, but in death it will not be able to keep me. So we
have in him the bishop of our souls \[1 Pet 2:25\], who has delivered us
from death and all danger of death, and has given us peace, and healed
us by his wounds.

But what was the Lord thinking when he suffered for us? Was he thinking
of retribution and vengeance against the Jews, his crucifiers? No; but,
\"When he was punished and martyred,\" says the prophet \[v. 7\], \"he
opened not his mouth, as a lamb that is led to the slaughter.\" For when
it is led to the slaughter, likewise when it is shorn, it does not open
its mouth, it makes no sound to indicate its pain. So our peacemaker,
our blessed, our physician, the arm of the Lord, the only begotten Son
of God, what did he do when he was punished and severely wounded? He did
not open his mouth, he did not utter a sound.

Thus Peter says \[1 Ep 2:23\], \"Who reproached not again when he was
reproached, neither grieved when he suffered.\" Thus Peter reliably
declares it by the Holy Spirit. There is the highest patience and
innocence. Not even by a word does he express a desire for revenge
against his enemies. For his thoughts were on peace and salvation, and
as he had made our sin-

694 L. x\'xin, 498-§oo. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi.
1117-1120. 695

whom he wants to heal through his wounds. He was not concerned with
vengeance and the ruin of his crucifiers, but how he would like to
redeem us.

**V. 8. But he is taken out of anguish and judgment; who will plead the
length of his life? For he is taken out of the land of the living, being
afflicted for the iniquity of my people.**

The prophet describes the glorification of Christ, to which he was to
enter through death. For he did not remain in death, as the Jews cried
that it would happen, but through death entered into the glory of his
Father, as he says Luc. 24, 26. He says, \"He is taken out of fear,\" or
out of the place of death or custody, \"and out of judgment.\" Ozer
actually means a prison or confinement; hence the prophet\'s opinion is
this: He was shut up, imprisoned, and subject to judgment, and condemned
by the public court, where there is no redemption or hope of redemption.

143\. and not only was he condemned by that judgment, and shut up in the
prison where he was brought by Annas and Caiphas, but he was also
condemned by the command of God, and endured the judgment of the law,
being both imprisoned and subjected to judgment by the law. \"We,\" they
say \[John 19:7\], \"have a law, and by the law he shall die, because he
made himself the Son of GOD.\" And on this they also insisted, \"He is
guilty of death\"; you have heard the testimony yourselves, \"what need
we of further testimony?\" He says he will come as the Son of God with
great power \[Matth. 26, 65. ff.\]. For it is written, \"Thou shalt not
have other gods.\" But now he has made himself the son of God,
consequently he is a blasphemer 2c. So the matter has a semblance with
the Jews, and they have no doubt adorned themselves with many sayings of
the holy Scriptures; as that they accuse him of not keeping the Sabbath,
of having fellowship with sinners and unclean men, who are

did not sacrifice 2c. Thus he was condemned by those with whom the
supreme authority stood by divine command, according to Deut. 17:12:
Whoever should disobey the priest, such a wicked man shalt thou put away
from among you.

\(144\) Although he was the Son of God, the Lord above all things, which
Caiphas and others did not know, he became a man, that he might become a
curse under the law, that he might redeem those who were under the law
from the curse of the law \[Gal. 3:13\]. And the LORD himself, who gave
the law, willed to be subject to the law; yet he excepted the Messiah,
and commanded that they should receive the same. Therefore, they cannot
be excused for this ignorance, because they themselves had seen, heard
and touched the Son of God, who with One Word did such miracles that
could not possibly be done by human power, as He Himself says: \"The
same works that I do testify of Me\" \[Jn 5:36, 1. \"Believe the works,
if you will not believe Me\" \[Jn 10:38\]. Therefore the chief priests
and others who crucified the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, are not
to be excused.

And yet their judgment was holy and of the greatest prestige, because it
would have been a great thing to be condemned according to the law of
God under this appearance, if he had been a mere man. For this judgment
would have been absolutely valid and would have become final. But he was
God and man; therefore it is said of him that he was taken away from the
custody in which he was held according to the law.

So he must necessarily be another man, who is no longer subject to this
civil power in the old law, nor to the ecclesiastical power and the
ordinary right of the priests; as Caiphas and others boasted that they
had the right and the ordinary power: If we do not kill him, then we sin
against God, and are disobedient to the law and Moses, according to
which he must die; likewise Joh. 11, 48: \"So then the Romans are
coming,\" namely if we do not kill this rebel and blasphemer. They cited
their righteousness, their justice and their ordinary authority.

**696** xxni, soo-502. broader explanation of Isa. 53, 8. w. vi,
1120-1123. **697**

But Christ was the true Lord over the law and over all rights and
authority; and yet he submitted himself voluntarily, although he was not
guilty of it, so that he might redeem us who were shut up under the law,
Gal. 3:23. Therefore he shut himself up first, that he might break out
and remove that judgment and custody or fear.

Now this Lord, this conqueror and breaker of hell, death and the law,
lives another life. This is the abolition of the law, which is intended
for another life and another reign. After breaking these bars, the laws
of hell, sin, death, he has abolished the whole law. He lives in another
exceedingly glorious 1) freedom. He was under the lock, but he was torn
out of it and entered into another life or another world. He died in
such a way that he did not perish, but was taken away to another life.
Since he is there, \"taken out of fear,\" and it is thus written: 2)

**Who wants to talk out the length of his life? (Generationem ejus quis
enarrabit?)**

148\. no one can talk out the life he has begun. Dor means generationem
\[sex or procreation\]. Jerome disputes about the generatio, whether the
prophet speaks of the divine generation from the Father or of the human
generation from the Virgin Mary. The prophet does not speak of this
origin of the divine or human generatio, but, as elsewhere the Scripture
speaks: From child to child I will tell your works \[Ps. 145, 4.\].
Likewise the Virgin Mary: \"They will call me blessed\".

1\) In the original and in the Erlanger: äuriors, which the Wittenberger
(since it does not fit at all) has changed into lidsriors. We assume
that äuriors was read out in the manuscript; therefore we have
substituted Wersetzt. Cf. Tischreden, cap. 27, § 112. St. Louis ed. vol.
XXII, 904: \"Another read sliosrs for dissrs.\" Elsewhere: eile instead
of die.

2\) The Erlanger edition has the words: tzui Mie \[st, ds anAustiu
sudlatus, st they c;uidsin drawn with the Bible text following the same.
After Mis \[st there is a question mark in the Erlanger. - The
Wittenberg has omitted these words (because not understood).

That is, that continuation is to be understood as a life that will last,
but not of mankind or deity, but of His kingdom. He was torn away from
that temporal bondage, when he was humbled among the angels. For thirty
years he walked on earth in the bondage of the law, and was a servant,
as he is called above, v. 1: \"Behold, my servant\"; but from that very
short and temporal, though very heavy bondage, he was taken away, and
set in a dominion of which there is no end, Isa. 9, 7: \"His dominion
shall be without end;\" and Luc. 1, 32: \"He shall be a king over the
house of Jacob for ever.\"

This is this generatio \[length of life\]. One will not write or say:
Christ, who suffered for us and was raised again, will sit or reign a
thousand years, or so and so many years, as it is said of worldly kings.
The years will not be so numbered, but, as it is said in the 102nd
Psalm, v. 27. 28. \"But thou remainest as thou art, but they shall pass
away, and thy years shall have no end.\" \"Of His kingdom there shall be
no end\" \[Luc. 1:33.\] He has indeed been in bondage, in prison, and in
death, so that he has also descended into hell; but he has been snatched
out of it, and transferred into an eternal kingdom, the end of which
cannot be spoken out. Dor occurs often in Moses \[2 Mos. 12, 14. 3 Mos.
3, 17.\]: Your custom \[shall be an eternal one\]; 3) this law you shall
keep from child to child, that is, \"for and for, always and forever\".

\(150\) This duration or length of days, or number of years, which he
will reign, no one will be able to excuse, because he is an eternal
king. The prophet places this in the midst of his suffering, that he is
set overcomer over the law, over all error, and over all that can
contain, judge, and rule in this mortal life, that he has been torn out
of all confinement, out of the torments of death and sin, and placed in
a lasting and eternal life.

3\) Added by us. Because here is obviously only a note of the copyist
which needs such an addition.

698 L. xxm, S02\--04. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1123-1126.
699

**For he is torn away from the land of the living, being afflicted for
the iniquity of my people (Quoniam abscissus est de terra viventium,
propter transgressiones populi mei plaga eis) 1)**

151 This passage is somewhat obscure because of the plural pronoun, lamo
for the sake of their plague. The seventy interpreters have: Pro sua
justitia (vel potius malitia) ductus est ad mortem \[for the sake of his
justice (or rather malice) he has been led to death\]. But grammar
stands in the way; I am hindered by Lamo, the third person pronoun. Our
Latin translator has given it thus: Propter peccata populi mei percussi
eum \[for the sin of my people I have smitten him\]. The sense is
excellent, but it does not agree well with the grammar.

Here we owe a great debt of gratitude to the devil and the Jews, who
have not only shamefully distorted these words, but have also confused
them with their distinctive signs as much as was possible. If they had
left the Isaiah in the division as they received it, the understanding
would be easier. Those who are concerned with the Hebrew must remember
that the Jews, wherever they can, distort the understanding, either by
ungodly interpretations, or, if they cannot do it in this way, by false
divisions, as in Daniel the seventy weeks have been shortened: there the
distortion can be grasped with the hands, there they separate and tear
apart what should be joined together; and all this out of hatred against
the Christians.

153\. Therefore, I command this to those who use the Hebrew language,
that they take heed to the wickedness of the devil and the rabbis, whose
only effort and work is this, that they corrupt, tear apart and turn
back the prophetic and Christian mind. De angustia quis enarrabit?
\[Here, too, the distinction is torn; for grammar and common sense
require a distinction in the middle of the text.

1\) This Latin translation is by Luther. - Erlanger: instead: Huoniam.

fertilizer; they make no distinction here as to how he was snatched
away, how he was afflicted.

154 \"He is snatched away from the land of the living\" (excissus), 2)
is a Hebrew expression, and means as much as, he was killed by force,
taken away from life, while he was still in a healthy, fresh and strong
body. The word exscindi \[\"to be snatched away\"\], which Isaiah uses
here, means an act of violence. Gasar \[XXX\] means to be set apart, to
be cut down, to be divided, as trees and wood are cut down and split;
as: They went into the forest to cut down and split trees 2c. \[So it is
said in the 136th Psalm, v. 13: \"He who divided the Red Sea into two
parts\"; from this comes the word Magsera, which is a saw that cuts
wood. Hence \"to be torn away\" is as much as to be torn apart by force;
that one does not fall down and die of his own accord, but is killed in
his prime and fresh years; as Christ was put away by an exceedingly
violent death on the cross of suffering. Therefore it is just as much as
to say, He died by violent hand, not a natural death. Thus Christ bore
our sin in the best bloom and time of His body and life.

The rest of the text troubles me more. I do not know whether the words,
propter or a transgressione populi mei plaga eis or illorum belong here
or there. I want to say my opinion: Whether here is a utilization
(ellipsis), an exchange of the numerus (enallage) or a distinction, I do
not know. He said that he had departed and was seated at the right hand
of the Father, and as Peter says: \"Having been exalted to the right
hand of God, to sit above the angels, he poured out this gift, Apost.
2:33, that he might be an everlasting king, and that his kingdom might
have no end. Christ died and rose again and will die no more \[Rom. 6,
9\]. For what purpose? What is actually the final cause of this kingdom?
\"For the sake of the transgression of my people, who have transgressed
their own will.

2\) Instead of 6X6I8U8 in the Latin editions, read 6Xeissus, because
Luther derives it from scioäo.

**700** L- xxm, S04-S06. Extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 8. W. vi,
1126-1123. **701**

plague.\" He sits in His kingdom not idle, nor for His own sake, but,
having been exalted to the right hand of God, He judges the world, and
has poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit. \"If I go,\" He says, \"I
will send the Comforter to you; if I go not, the Comforter will not come
to you\" \[John 16:7\]. Therefore he was snatched away, and cut off from
the earth, that he might exercise the power and effect of this his
suffering, that he might deliver us, not only according to grace, but
also according to the gift, for the renewing of our nature; as it is
said, \"Thou hast ascended on high, and hast received gifts for men\"
\[Ps. 68:19\].

156\. For this reason he sits at the right hand of God, the eternal
Father, so that, according to the mission of the Holy Spirit, he not
only heals us through the reckoning, since the forgiveness of sins is
given to us because of his death, but that he is also powerful in us,
and brings us from sin to righteousness, He heals body and soul, not
only by remission, but also by a complete eradication and taking away of
sin, so that we may be pure without all fear of sin, serving God freely
(*motu*) and with fervor in all godliness and holiness of life. He was
transferred to another life so that he might heal us from the sin and
transgression that was our plague. The devil has corrupted our whole
nature and flesh by a fierce and unconquerable poison; he has weakened
and corrupted it by a very severe plague, namely to sin and eternal
death. So that God might destroy this plague by a powerful remedy, He
sent this gift, which you see, for the sake of this transgression, which
is the plague of My people, as John also says: \"For this purpose the
Son of God appeared, that He might destroy the works of the devil\" \[1
John 3:8\], that is, sin, death and hell.

157 Therefore, the relative pronoun \[*quae* plaga eis\] must be added
as an addition, as it is often done in the prophets. In the prophets,
the relative qui, quae, quod is often omitted. This is simply my
opinion. If this is not the actual understanding, it is nevertheless
true in and for

himself. The Son of God, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, has not only
earned the forgiveness of sins and the reconciliation through His
suffering, but also the gift, because through Christ not only grace was
given, but also truth, John 1:17. In Christ there is no empty pretense
that only grace has been obtained, but rather sin is also swept away.

But this passage cannot serve the antinomians, who make sin so small as
if it were nothing at all, because it has been forgiven. Do we want to
remain in sin because sin is forgiven and taken away and because we are
under grace? Rom. 6, 1. That would be being in grace without truth, that
is, an empty appearance. Sin is not only forgiven, but also cast out and
taken away. Not only grace, but also the gift is truth, Eph. 4, 21. Why
then do you remain in sins? Do you not know that Christ died and sin is
forgiven? Therefore, do not remain in hatred, drunkenness or adultery.
Christ suffered for the forgiveness of sins, not for the licentiousness
of the flesh and evil desire, as the pope accuses us of this terrible
blasphemy, as if we were teaching that men should live safely, without
law, in the remission of all sins, because the law is not binding, so
that it could condemn. The ceremonies are abolished, and the moral law
abolished, so that it does not plague our consciences; not in a bad way,
but in spirit, because the old leaven must be swept out, so that we may
be a new dough, 1 Cor. 5:7; that is swept out, killed, burned, so that
the body of sin may cease \[Rom. 6:6\]. 1)

For this reason the righteous character \[Eph. 4:21\] is spoken of, that
we might be freed from sin in deed, and that sin might be put away.
Christ is seated at the right hand of the Father, and was taken away for
our sake, not only that we might be children in grace through the
forgiveness of sins, but also that we might be cleansed day by day by
the Holy Spirit we have received.

1\) Instead of \"Zestruat in the editions is to be read with the Vulgate
äestruutur.

[702 L. xxm, SM-SV8. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1128-iisi.
703]{.underline}

until we become completely clean on the last day, without the remnants
of sin, which always irritate and draw us back. For behold, how weak and
unclean we are: we often fall; sin, which opposes the law in our minds,
takes us captive without ceasing, so that Christ was also compelled to
give us a daily remedy against it, commanding to forgive seventy times
seven times as often as our brother sins against us. 2c, Matth. 18, 1)
21. 22. Paul opposes and fights against the law in his mind \[Rom. 7,
23.\], although sin is forgiven and not imputed. Therefore sin is our
plague; it lies on our neck; he also wants to heal it.

V. 9. **and he was buried like the wicked, 2) and died like a rich
man.**

160 We read in (secundum) the old translation (the Vulgate): Pro
sepultura sua, et divites pro morte sua. The ancients explain this in
such a way that Christ gave the godless and hopeful Jews for his burial,
that is, that he was redeemed for his person, and the Jews were
delivered into the hands of the Romans instead of him; as Proverbs 21:18
reads: The righteous will be delivered, and \"the godless must be given
for him. This is the mind they draw here. This is indeed God\'s common
way of working, for no one escapes the judgment of God, who must finally
fall into it. And no righteous person is abandoned, but he is finally
redeemed. Thus the wicked does not escape, but is delivered. But that
this saying is drawn from the proverbs does not rhyme, because the
prophet does not speak of a calm and happy but of a cruel death in this
place. So now, I say, Lyra, Jerome, Augustine explain these words of the
prophet: He will punish the wicked for his be-

1\) In the Latin editions: Nattü. 8.

2\) This is how Luther translated it in Latin: Lt äadit inipios vsl
intsr iwplos \[spuleiiruw suuw. The old translator considered this to be
the translation of the Vulgate, and vice versa. By the word \[seunäuru
he was led to believe that Luther had made the reading of the Vulgate
his own. But Luther sticks to his above mentioned translation, as can be
seen from 8163.

This means that the godless Jews were handed over for the redeemed
Christ to die in this life and to eternal death, because the Romans
killed them all. We can let this be a good, godly and true opinion; but
we are talking about whether it is suitable for this passage. For it is
another thing whether an opinion be true; and again, whether it be the
real opinion in this or that place.

161 Others explain it like this: Quod divites dabit pro sepulchro \[that
he will give rich people for the grave\], that is, Joseph of Arimathea,
who was rich, buried the Lord, and that in an honest place. But this
seems unseemly. Although in the Scriptures a rich man generally
indicates an ungodly man, yet when the name of a righteous man is added,
it does not denote an ungodly man. The \"ungodly\" are thereby
designated Matth. 19, 24: \"It is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God\";
likewise Luc. 6, 24: \"Woe to you rich men\" 2c. In this passage in the
prophet, a rich man means an ungodly man. Joseph, however, was not an
ungodly man, but a disciple, albeit a secret one. And God does not
reject, neither the rich nor the poor 2c. if they are not ungodly, as,
unfaithful workers, likewise miserly; as Jerome says, \"Every rich man
is either unrighteous, or an heir of an unrighteous man. And Paul says
\[1 Tim. 6, 10.\], \"Avarice is a root of all evil\"; he also calls the
avaricious \"idolaters\" \[Eph. 5, 5.). For men seldom need riches
rightly, as the daily examples superfluously testify; hence also the
heathen cry, O gold! thou art the cause of all fog; and the poet says:

*\*Αδιχον b πλούτος πολλά fi\' όυχ ορ&ώς ποιεί* \[wealth is something
unjust, it does many things, but not right), likewise:

*Πολλών τά χρήματα αίτ\" άνΰρώποις χάχων* \[wealth gives people cause
for much evil). What is more glorious than peace, worldly power, glory
and honor 2c.? But how much are these gifts of God misused? When a
lawyer or theologian realizes that he has learned something, he thinks
to himself

704 **7L. XXIII, 5V8-S1V.** More extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 9.
**W. VI, H3I-II34.** 705

To be an angel above all the angels of God. The creatures are good, but
subject to vanity. A whore has a beautiful body, but it serves for the
most shameful trade. Thus an ungodly man is called a rich man. But
Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, just as Abraham, David were not poor 2c.

Therefore Joseph is not to be understood here among the rich, as Lyra,
Jerome and Augustinus explain it. And also his \[Christ\'s\] grave was
not dishonest because he was buried near the place of the skull, but the
grave is honest. Joseph of Arimathea was not at all timid, because he
took the liberty of burying the crucified Christ in his own tomb, even
against the will of the chief priests. Therefore he must have been an
honest and godly man, otherwise he would have thought: This Jesus was
condemned by the chief priests, scribes, elders of the people, and the
whole nation, and was crucified in the most shameful way; I will incur
the hatred of all the priests, of the whole synagogue, if I want to take
him down from the cross and lay him in my tomb and honor him, who was
condemned by them as a blasphemer and rebel.

Therefore I leave these interpretations and translate and explain it
like this: Et dabitur, impersonal (impersonaliter), as Luc. 6, 38.
mensurabunt stands for mensurabitur, and dabunt for dabitur. Thus we
want to explain the verbum activum passive, or impersonaliter, to make
the understanding clearer: Dabitur cum impiis sepulchrum suum; or: Dabit
cum impiis sepulchrum suum, in the accusative. But it cannot all the
time be given by the accusative; therefore it must be translated either
by the preposition cum, or by some other particle, as sicut: Et sicut
cum divite \[how to deal with a rich), that is, an ungodly, an
idolatrous, a sinner, when he has died.

164 Therefore the opinion should be this (for I cannot find a more
convenient one), namely, that the Jews have not been satisfied by
killing our Savior and snatching him away from the land of the living.
Thus all the wicked are murderers. They let themselves

They are not satisfied with the fact that someone is killed; they do not
leave it at this cruelty, that they have executed the godly in such a
cruel and terrible way, as the civil authority and worldly justice is
satisfied by death or by the life sentence of the thief. But it is
something devilish to rage against a dead body, because it must die
twice, as it were. Yes, if they could, they would kill it a hundred
times.

Thus the pope also burned John Hus and his companion, Jerome of Prague,
at Costnitz for the sake of the word of God; the pope was not content
with this, but he also had the ashes and the place where the ashes lay
dug up a whole cubit deep and thrown into the Rhine, so that no one, not
even from the earth on which he was burned, could take anything away in
memory. This is dying not twice, but a thousand times. For what has the
wretched earth sinned that it too was dug up and thrown into the Rhine?
After this, when Hus had already been burned and the ashes thrown into
the water, he also did this: They banished him, they cursed him, they
condemned his name, they erased his memory forever, and they threw his
soul into the lowest hell. Thus the holy martyr of God, John Hus, did
not suffer a simple death, but a triple, quadruple, yes, multiple death.
He was burned, immersed in water, then led through the water to all
lands, and his name was erased and destroyed, his soul was given to the
devil and banished to the lowest hell.

This is the insatiable rage of the devil and his followers. This, as I
said above 164), no worldly authority does; it rests and ceases when the
death penalty has been carried out on the guilty party. So here, too,
they cruelly snatch Christ away from the land of the living, go to
Pilate, and say: \"Lord, we thought that this deceiver spoke while he
was still alive: I will rise again after three days\" \[Matth. 27,
63.\]. They are ready to kill again the one who has already been killed
once. For they are so possessed by the devil that they think that his

706 L. xxm. sio-512. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 1134-1137.
707

Disciples could come by night and steal His body, Matth. 27, 64.
Therefore they want to prevent the other life so that He would not rise
again and come back to life. They say to Pilate: Put out a guard. None
of his friends, not even the women who followed him, may be at the tomb,
but godless soldiers will be placed in front of it; indeed, they would
kill the already buried man 1) again if he wanted to come back to life.

Even today, their insatiable hatred and lust and will to kill does not
cease. The Jews still kill Christ daily, not only by will, but also by
deed. For they murder many little children and boys of the Christians.
In short, they are slayers for eternity. This, I think, Isaiah intended
to indicate; and therefore there is a special emphasis on the word in
the plural, \"in his deaths,\" \[XXXXX\] so that he might make this
insatiable hatred of theirs greater, that if there were a multiple
death, he would never die sufficiently for them, but rather they would
always tempt him to death again.

168\. He was also buried like an ungodly man and suffers in the grave,
and they think they have not punished him enough. In such a way we also
suffer from them. So this rhymes with what follows. He suffers all this
in life and in death. He is cruelly torn away from life, and even after
his death he is guarded in the grave as an ungodly man, and as the
greatest villain among all men who ever came to the face of the earth.

**Although he has wronged no one, nor has there been deceit in his
mouth.**

All who kill him cannot find any sin in him; indeed, he sinned neither
with words nor with works, but was both wholesome with his tongue and
with his works. For Isaiah wants to give more to understand than he
expresses in words, namely, that with every word and work he had wrought
benefit. There was nothing in him that did harm,

1\) Erlanger: kspultu und oeoiäant instead of: kspultuna und oeoiäSrsnt
in the Wittenberg.

but all was wholesome; and yet he must die.

What do we boast about our sufferings? Christ\'s suffering is far more
cruel in every way. The prophet omits nothing that serves to magnify
suffering against the suffering of all men. And even if we look at human
nature, that is, if he were only a mere man, it would still be an
abominable and appalling cruelty. But so he had to be cruelly torn away
from the laude of the living. He had become the sacrifice for us,
therefore all the rage of the devil and the world had to fall on him and
be spewed out against him; the devil had to let out all his rage against
this person and pour it out on him, so that he would devour him
completely.

Since there is nothing left for them to rage against, the Lord rises
again and overcomes and devours sin, death, the devil, the law, hell,
and all the evils that afflict us, so that there is nothing left of
them. Therefore, whoever believes in Christ, sin, death and the devil
cannot harm him. For the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, has
swallowed up all the ravages of the devil and what he spews forth with
great splendor and glory. Therefore, whoever believes in Him, as has
already been said, the devil is overcome, cast down and trampled
underfoot, as it is said in Genesis 3:15: \"The seed of the woman shall
bruise the head of the serpent\"; if only he believes. He sits at the
right hand of the eternal Father; after he has died once, he dies no
more \[Rom. 6, 9.\], yes, he now rules and triumphs over the
principalities, which he has stripped of their armor, and which he has
publicly displayed, Col. 2, 15. And we do this through him, Micah 2, 13.
Although he \[the devil\] sets his teeth into the flesh, he lures
against the sting in vain, and strikes with his claws at its
iron-armored sides (ipsius ferratis).

**V.10. But the LORD would thus smite him with disease. When he has
given his life for a trespass offering, he will have seed and live to
the end, and the LORD\'s purpose will continue by his hand.**

**\
708** xxm, 512-sii. More extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 10. W. vi.
1137-1139. **709**

I leave it to your own judgment, how suitably the Jews interpret this
chapter of Isaiah of themselves, how they are in their present
captivity, how it rhymes, and how true it can be said of them: \"He
opened not his mouth\"; he sinned neither with words nor with works;
likewise, whether they are taken out of fear and judgment 2c. From this
it is evident how beautifully they interpret the Scriptures. They drag
the most holy words of our Savior by their falsification, which is not
human but devilish, to their nefarious, shameful nature. They think that
they are holy, innocent, pure and without any sin in regard to the
Gentiles. Thus we Gentiles are unclean before them, since they are among
themselves like the most wicked people, and the better the worse.

But all this happened 1) according to divine counsel and will. They
should not have touched him in the least, not even a hair. But this was
the cause of the suffering of the Son of God, namely that he suffered
according to God\'s will. God willed it so. But as for the Jews, He did
not will it, but only allowed it; as Peter Apost. 3, 18: \"What God
declared beforehand by the mouth of all His prophets, 2) how Christ
should suffer, He fulfilled\": \"You crucified the same, 3) who was
devoted to God out of deliberate counsel\", Apost. 2, 23. 2, 23. God
allowed it and wanted it to happen. Why? So that he would be a sacrifice
for us. God wanted to crush the head of the serpent \[Gen. 3, 15\], that
is, to destroy the kingdom of the devil, of sin, of death, so that the
kingdom of righteousness, of salvation and of eternal life would be
established.

This has been God\'s will. To the end, everything happened because God
does not delight in unrighteousness, nor in sin, nor in death, but in
righteousness, in faith 2c. In this final cause God has his pleasure,
and on the same he has had his purpose. The Lord wanted, and

1\) Erlanger: aut instead of: buzzes in the Wittenberger.

2\) Instead of prasdieit should probably be read prnsäixit. Vulgate:
prasnunviavit.

3\) Instead of Vsuin we suppose: Dsi. Vulgate:

Uuno \... vtzi. After this conjecture we have translated.

It pleased him well that he should thus smite him. They did not know
that he was the Lord of glory, as Peter says: \"You did it through
ignorance \[Acts 3:17\], and even wickedly, but God turned it for the
best. The good effect and the final cause is this: that you may obtain
salvation. He sends the Holy Spirit that you should repent, that you may
be helped, that you may be blessed, that you may be saved sApost. 3, 19.
26.\]. The sacrifice has been offered, salvation has been obtained, the
devil has been overcome along with sin and death: only accept it and
grasp it in faith. For this is the will of the Lord, and therefore he
hath wrought to destroy him.

**If he has given his life for a guilt offering, he will have seed and
live to the end.**

175 He did not die and be buried, so that he should remain in death and
in the grave, but in the beginning of the chapter \[v. 2\] he said: \"He
springs up before him like a rice, and like a root out of dry ground.
The grain that is cast into the ground does not die, but to the end it
is cast into the ground that it may bear fruit a hundredfold. Christ
does not die to become ashes, but to fill the world with righteousness,
salvation and life, to restore the kingdom of heaven. He did not die
that He might perish, but that He might give His life as a guilt
offering, as a sin offering, or as Paul calls it, a sacrifice, that is,
an atoning sacrifice for sin \[Heb. 10:12, Eph. 5:2\]. This has been
God\'s will that he would be a sacrifice, a propitiation, a ransom, a
redemption, a payment for sins. For the wrath of God could not be
propitiated and cancelled in any other way than by such and such a great
sacrifice as the Son of God is, who could not sin. There were no other
sacrifices by which GOD could be reconciled than this sacrifice when
Christ gave His life for \[guilt\] offering. Yes, all the sacrifices of
the Old Testament are antitypes *(άντίτυπα) of* this sacrifice of the
Son

God, as the epistle to the Hebrews \[Cap. 9, 24\] speaks.

710 **xxm, 514-they.** Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi,
**1139-1142.** 711

The word asham, which the prophet uses here, also appealed to the
apostle Paul, Rom. 8, 3: \"God condemned sin through sin\"; and 2 Cor.
5, 21: \"God made him who knew no sin to be sin for us.\" As it is said
here, He who did no sin, so it is said of the prophet, \"There was no
deceit in his mouth,\" and yet he was made sin, that he might give his
life for guilt (delictum), or, as we properly call it, for a
guilt-offering. Thus Moses calls Asham the sacrifice itself, or the
sacrifice for sin \[Deut. 5:6.\]. Christ gave his life, not par
excellence for sacrifice, but actually for sacrifice for sin, that is,
he made himself sin, our sacrifice. The grammarians dispute whether this
is true if he thus gave his life, that is, through guilt or through sin;
but there is nothing in it; that is, if he himself made his sacrifice,
or made himself a sacrifice, that he thus saw the seed which had long
life.

**Thus he will have seed, and live into the length.**

177 \[Vulgate: Videbit semen longaevum, he will see seed that has long
life\]. This is what the prophet now and then prophesies of the kingdom
of Christ, as it is said in the Psalms: In righteousness and judgment
shall their children be established \[Ps. 89, 15.\], they shall dwell,
and their kingdom shall endure forever. Likewise: Upon his throne thy
children shall be for ever \[Ps. 89, 5. 30. 37.\], their seed shall
flourish \[Ps. 102, 29.\], that is, the kingdom of Christ shall endure,
his seed shall be propagated; as long as the sun shines, and the moon
abideth, the propagation of that seed shall endure \[Ps. 72, 17. 89,
37.f.\]. So long will the procreation, or, as it is called, the seed
last, until the whole church will be gathered, then this procreation or
revival of the seed will cease. Then also there will no longer be a
bodily nor a spiritual procreation; we will no longer teach, nor be
baptized, nor believe, nor hope, but we will only love and be joyful,
and enjoy eternal life and blessedness. This is what it means when it
says that the kingdom of Christ will be prolonged.

of days (regnum Christi manere in longitudinem dierum). This he will
have for his suffering, that his kingdom, as said, will remain and be
planted and grow; it will be increased without end until the day when he
will hand over the kingdom to God and the Father. But in the meantime he
must reign \[1 Cor. 15:24, 25\].

**And the LORD\'s nobility will go away by his hand.**

This belongs to the previous words, of the seed that shall endure;
because it was the will of the Lord that he should be broken. And
therefore, when he shall have given his life for a trespass offering, he
shall have seed that endureth for ever. And the will of the Lord shall
go forth by his hand, and shall have good fortune, as it is said in Ps.
118:25, \"O Lord, help! O Lord, prosper!\"

These words include the terrifying tyranny and power of the devil, as he
says below \[v. 12\] about the distribution of the plunder. There is no
happiness, strength or victory against the kingdom and tyranny of the
devil. Death robs everything, and the devil through death, and he is
called the author of death.

Accordingly, the will of the Lord is called the victory and the divine
work by which the work of the devil is destroyed and the prison is taken
captive, and as it is said in the Gospel: When a strong man is overcome
and bound, his robbery is snatched away from him 1) \[Luc. 11, 22\].
Likewise Christ says \[Joh. 6, 39.\]: This is the will of God, that the
Son of Man is sent to redeem the human race from sin, from death, from
the law, from the power of the devil. This will of God now proceeds
happily. Why does he use the word: \"It will go away\"? Because of the
violence and tyranny of the devil against the human race.

All monks, Turks and pagans toil with great zeal and lead the hardest of
lifestyles with incredible effort;

1\) Instead of cUripuerunt in the Erlangen edition will read
äirixinutnr. The Wittenberg edition has here Luc. II, 22. according to
the Vulgate.

712 L. XXIII, p16-518. broader explanation of Isa. 53, 10. W. VI,
II42-II4S. 71Z

and the harder and stricter the way of life, the better they hope to
escape this tyranny. But nothing happens happily, and it gets worse from
day to day, as with the bloody woman \[Marc. 5, 26\]. The more nature
tries to wriggle out of sin and death, the more it is repulsed and the
deeper it falls under this tyranny. It takes a great deal of work for
even a Christian who has been baptized and washed in the blood of Christ
to break through and pass from judgment to life; what can a monk
accomplish who wants to become blessed by his death, by his work, by his
vows and devotions? There nothing goes; everything that one undertakes
goes the canker course, as one is wont to say. The priests of Baal
scratched themselves with awls until their blood ran \[1 Kings 18:28\],
they sacrificed their sons and daughters. Ahaz, the exceedingly godless
king in Judah, how astonishingly devout he was: he also did not omit any
outward worship, that he might propitiate GOD. But the only means and
the only way is Christ, by whose hand the Lord\'s purpose proceeds.
Everything goes most happily for us when we take hold of Christ, \"in
whom are hidden all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God\"
\[Col. 2:3\].

God\'s purpose and will does not proceed through our hands or works, but
through Christ who gave Himself for our sins. Through him the Holy
Spirit is given that we may break through, but not without effort or
pain. For the flesh is like lead, and always pulls us down and back, and
the devil puts obstacles in the way. Therefore, it is not with laughter,
but with great struggle, with great labor, with great difficulty, with
grumbling and rebelliousness of the flesh, although the Spirit is joyful
and willing.

183\. XXX, the will, the intention, the intending, the pleasing,
generally means that which I want to do, \"which I like to do, so that I
may go around,\" as Solomon 1) says of the woman.

1\) Here a significant corruption of the text seems to us. Instead of
Roolskinstes, Solomon s?rov. 31, 13.j will have to be read, where the
mentioned expression is found; in Ecclesiastes Solomon is nothing like
that of the woman.

says \[Proverbs 31:13\], which also has its XXX, üud as Ecclesiastes
says \[Cap. 3:1\]: \"Everything that is planned (XXX) has its time.\"
Nothing comes of it before the time; as it is also said: the year brings
forth the fruits, not the field. If one wanted to sow in the winter, scl
one would work in vain. Everything must happen in its time. The Latins
say: Veni in tempore, quod omnium primum est \[one must come at the
right time, that is what matters most\]. Cato 2) calls it \"the
opportunity\". Thus it means XXX that which he has resolved to do,φ
*εύδόχησε,* in which he is well pleased; as he says of his Son, our Lord
JEsu Christo \[Matth. 3, 17.\], \"This is my dear Son, in whom I am well
pleased,\" *έ\" φ ευδό- χησα,* that is, on whom all my purpose and will
rest, \"in which I delight my heart and see,\" as he says John 6:29,
\"This is the work of GOD, that ye believe on him.\" For this purpose he
has sent his Son, that we should hear him \[Matth. 17, 5.\], and that
through him all things in heaven and on earth should be restored, until
the time when all things shall be restored, Apost. 3, 21.

184 In this Christ lies everything, all the treasures of the wisdom and
knowledge of God \[Col. 2, 3\], and everything exists through Him and in
Him; in short, everything must be summed up in Him, that is, all the
purpose and will of God, everything lies in the Son, who became flesh
and was revealed for our sake.

In this way, the work of the Lord continues and flourishes, despite the
fact that Satan resists with all his strength and effort, oppresses all
those who confess the Son of God with a single syllable, kills the
prophets, apostles, martyrs, resists the confessors, has a large
following (partem) in our flesh, so that it seems as if the work of God
is hindered and does not flourish and does not take place. Just read the
history of the church and you will see how many different ways this work
is often **said to be. - Immediately following should be read about: st
ut I\^oolosinstes: Omnts netto (P2N) Unket \[num torapns.**

2\) In the Erlanger: onro instead of 6nto.

714 **L. XXIII, 518 f. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1145-1148.** 715

devil has been prevented. And yet the work of God always goes on
happily, now already five thousand five hundred years, because it is
written: \"By his hand shall the Lord\'s purpose continue\", although
the contradiction is completely before our eyes. Look at the history,
then you will say with the prophet \[Ps. 119, 52.\]: Lord, when I
remember your works, 1) I am comforted. For your horses walk in the sea,
in the mud of great waters \[Habak. 3, 15.\]. The devil hangs on the
wheel, and prevents it. We must not wish for anything better than what
all the godly have encountered from the beginning of the world. This is
what happened to Adam, Noah, Abraham, to whom it seemed as if the
Lord\'s purpose was not only prevented but also completely destroyed.
But he breaks through; not by our hand, but by the hand of the Lord
Jehovah himself it continues.

**V.11. Because his soul has labored, he will see his delight and have
fullness. And by his knowledge, he, my servant the righteous, will make
many righteous, for he bears their sin.**

Here again one sees the malice, the roguishness, and the terrible envy
of the Jews, who have confused the division of these words and falsified
the text. The seventy interpreters are worthy of hatred. For I cannot
believe, nor is it true, that they have translated the Bible by
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, for their vanity, malice, and intent to
falsify the holy Scriptures are quite evident. Therefore, we must divide
the text ourselves. Si anima sua se posuerit vel a labore, vel miseria
animae suae, videbit^2^ ) et saturabitur \[when his soul will have come
to rest, either from the labor or the anguish of his soul, he will see
his pleasure and have the fullness\]. For the preceding text must agree
and be connected with the following. The seventy interpreters have
translated it thus, Si dederitis pro delicto etc. Et Dominus vult
auferre de do-.

1\) In the text: opkrum, but in the Vulgate and in our Bible:
judieiorum.

2\) Erlanger: vidkbitur instead of: videiüt.

lore animam ejus, ostendere lucem, justificare justum. But what is this?
It is impossible that not also a beginner in the Hebrew language should
see that the text was falsified with diligence, from pure malice. If the
seventy interpreters have translated it in such a way, then they were
the most obnoxious people, who only wanted to mock the king Ptolemy
Philadelphus, who sought a translation with such great diligence and
zeal.

They distort both the meaning and the division. I believe they have
translated it this way for the sake of inducing the more abundant
almsgiving: If ye give for iniquity, that is, if ye sacrifice, ye shall
live long; and the LORD will take away the pain. This is not the opinion
of the prophet. But how can they brazenly presume to invent a meaning
according to their liking, and to change and twist the words of the
text? Does that mean translating? Thus Isa. 9, 6: Vocabitur nomen ejus
magni consilii, mirandus consiliarius. For these are their words, lest
any man think as if we did them wrong: *Kal χαλεΐται το όνομα άυτοΰ
μεγάλης βουλής άγγελος, θαυμαστός σύμβουλος.*

But this means to falsify with diligence and malice the clearest words,
in which there is nothing dark or difficult. Instead of the six words:
\"And he is called\" 2c. Wonderful, Council, Power) Hero, Everlasting
Father, Peacefors\] they translated: Magni consilii angelus.

Thus do they translate, nay rather pervert, the most beautiful and
consoling saying. This is what I command those who are concerned about
the Hebrew language, that they take care of it and do not excuse or
allow the dreams of those, as Jerome excuses the seventy interpreters by
a public pronouncement (publica auctoritate). I do not excuse them, nor
do I see that the apostles made use of their translation, although it
can be seen that they read it, but they do not follow the falsification.
Where they see that the seventy interpreters deviate, the apostles
rather stick to the Hebrew text; as in the saying Is. 25, 8. where they
translated: Death has devoured; Paul translated it rightly: \"Death has
devoured\".

716 **L. xxiil, st\"-\[2t. More extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 11. W.
vi, ii48-nsi.** 717

Although in this passage the word is written in such a way that there is
still some semblance. But here their translation has no semblance at
all, as anyone who understands only a little Hebrew can judge. This
cannot be excused by saying that they did it out of ignorance, but the
wickedness is undeniable and obvious.

189\. Accordingly, the meaning is this, as the true text in Hebrew gives
it: Propter laborem animae suae videbit \[for the sake of the labor of
his soul he will see\], namely, with joy and with pleasure. For the
Hebrew word here does not mean to look at something quickly and leave it
again, but in such a way that one dwells on it, and remains with what
one sees; as Virgilius 1) speaks: Juvat usque morari \[It delights them
to dwell long\]. This is how we have explained it everywhere. That is,
when the Lord\'s will shall proceed, he shall see a seed that liveth
long, and such a seed, in which he shall have his delight when he seeth
it; and he shall not only have his delight in it, but he shall see it
many times, and be satiated with it. As it is said in Ps. 17:15
\[Vulg.\], \"I will be satisfied when thy glory shall appear.\" Likewise
Ps. 16:11: \"Before thee is fullness of joy, and lovingkindness at thy
right hand.\" 2) That is, with delight, and to see enough of it. That
is, Christ will see the fruit of his suffering, his resurrection, how
the church overcomes death, sin, the devil; he will see with great joy
that sin is thrown to the ground, death is devoured, the devil is
strangled. And not only he will be satisfied with this, but also you
with him.

190\) The prophet repeats again and again the suffering of Christ, as
almost the whole chapter has been nothing but repetitions, but in such a
way that he always adds something, namely, that he died for sin; that
there was no beauty in him; that he was the most despised and unworthy
of all.

1\) Virg. \^6n., lid. VI, v. 487.

2\) In the Erlangen edition there are three errors in this biblical
quotation: enrn instead of MS; tnm instead of \"only; ä \"l66tntion6
instead of äkwetntioneg. The Wittenberg has improved these errors
according to the Vulgate.

was the most precious. He bore our sickness and took upon himself our
pain. The punishment is on him, so that we may have peace 2c. Thus,
although they are all repetitions, something is always added, as here:
\"He gave his life for a trespass offering, that he might have seed to
last.\" His soul labored and was afflicted, that he might see joy, be
satisfied with pleasure, and have fullness of joy.

The prophet marvels and marvels at the incredible importance of this
thing, that the Father sends the Son, and at God\'s utterly
pronounceable counsel, that he lets him be snatched away from the land
of the living, and become the most despised and the least among men, for
the sake of our sin. Therefore he is forced to make many words, and to
strike out the matter. For the prophet Isaiah is very eloquent at this
point, and can say the same thing over and over again in different words
and in a different way. These are real orators who always say the same
thing in new words and in a different way, and yet always know how to
add something very emphatic. People of great intellect and eloquence can
do this. Yes, he will see his pleasure, and indeed he will see his fill,
and all his faithful with him, because he has become a guilt offering,
because he has sweated bloody sweat, for our great benefit, and for his
great joy. He himself, the overcomer, will rejoice, who is our life, our
righteousness and our blessedness. We will give him thanks that he was
torn away from the land of the living, died, and thus became an
overcomer. But how will he be satisfied and see his pleasure?

**By his knowledge he, my servant the righteous, will make many
righteous.**

Here again he gives him the name of a servant, since he is God and does
God\'s work and fulfills God\'s will. \"He, my servant, the righteous
one, of whom he said above \[v. 9\]: \"He has done no sin, nor has any
deceit been found in his mouth,\" rather he has done only pure good,
spoken only wholesome things,

718 **L. XXIII, 521-523. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
II51-1I53.** 719

There was nothing punishable about him: and yet this completely innocent
young man suffers a cruel death. Now 1) he has been justified from sin
by this death of his. He is innocent, an unblemished lamb, conceived by
the Holy Spirit without all sin; but this suffering servant will not
keep this righteousness to himself, but with this bruising, with which
he has been bruised by GOD, as an innocent and holy one, with this
servitude, I say, and with this obedience, he has not been a servant for
his own good, nor for his own sake, but in this he has been GOD\'s
servant, that he might also by this servitude make many righteous. This
is the fruit of his suffering: he makes righteous and redeemed people
free from death, from sin, and from the power of the devil. This is the
ministry of this servant, that he may serve us in his suffering.

What is the way by which he makes us righteous? How, and by what means,
do we arrive at the fruit and end of this work? By no other way, and in
no other way, than through his soul or knowledge. This is also how Peter
explains it, and rightly so: \"Grow in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ\" \[2 Pet. 3:18\]. The seventy interpreters translated this
knowledge by the word scientia. This knowledge is faith itself; not only
the historical one, with which also the devil believes and confesses
God, as also the heretics do, but it is a knowledge, which stands in
experience, and a \[more living faith. 2) This word \[\"to know\" in the
saying\] means: \"Adam knew his wife\" \[1 Mof. 4, 1.\], he knew her
through sensation, he learned that she was his wife; not through a mere
speculation or historical way, but through experience. Therefore this
very word is often translated by doctrine, that is, a true living
knowledge; not by experience.

1\) In the Latin editions: non, for which probably nuno should be read,
this has already been assumed by the old translator.

2\) Here again is corrupted text: et üäes sIZniüoat Noo vooaduluru. We
have put a period after üües.

merely one through which I hear and tell something, but through which I
grasp this knowledge, base myself on it, and follow it, because it
penetrates the heart, that I hope and do not doubt, that I am calm, and
from this I trust that Christ suffered for me.

194 Historical faith does not do this; it does not proceed to this
experience, which is felt, and to this knowledge, which stands in the
experience. He does say, I believe that Christ suffered, and also for
me; but he does not seek to bring it about that he may feel and
experience it. But true faith firmly holds \[Hohel. 6, 2.\], \"My friend
is mine,\" and I will take him with joy; as Simeon sings \[Luc. 2, 29.
30.\], \"Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace.\" This was not
merely seeing in imagination, but it consisted in experience, whereby
the soul as well as the body is set in motion, and feels a renewal and
living movement. The other faith hears, but the heart is not moved by
it. He who is only a hearer of the word is like a man who looks at his
bodily face in the mirror, Jac. 1:23. He who hears about Christ and does
not have true faith, but only the foam and the outer shell of it, is
like a man who goes away from the mirror in which he looked at himself.
But he who truly believes, whose heart is stirred by the Holy Spirit,
keeps it and is well pleased.

Therefore you see that the apostles made a distinction among faith, and
spoke not of an outward, temporary, and inoperative knowledge, but of a
true knowledge that tastes the sweetness of God, as he speaks here, in
the soul; that is, through such a knowledge, which stands in experience,
which is true and living, he will make many righteous. For this reason
he died, for this reason he rose again, for this reason he fulfilled all
things, for this reason he did all things, that you might believe in him
and be saved.

By his knowledge.

196\. it can be understood \[seisutia also aotivs, because this belief
certainly has its

**720** L. XXIII, 523-525. broader explanation of Isa. 53, 11. W. VI,
H53-II5S. **721**

The gift is that we accept this benefit with all our heart, and that the
heart begins to marvel, that it feels another movement, not of itself,
but of Christ. Is this true? he begins to wonder with great
astonishment; I, a sinner, should believe this? Surely you look at
Christ differently than before; you shall be satisfied in him and have
your delight in him, and he in you.

**He will make many righteous.**

197 The prophet uses the word \"many\" for \"all\" according to Paul\'s
way Rom. 5, 15. It stands in relation (in relatione): One has sinned,
one is righteous; and many are made righteous. There is no difference
between many and all. The righteousness of Christ, the only begotten Son
of God, our Lord and Savior, is so great that it could make an infinite
number of worlds righteous. \"He will make many righteous,\" he says,
that is, all. Therefore it is to be understood by all, because he offers
his righteousness to all, which also all obtain who believe in Christ,
according to the saying \[Marc. 16, 16.\], \"He that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved.\" And John 6:39, 40: \"This is the will of the
Father which hath sent me, that I should lose nothing of all that he
hath given me; but that I should raise it up at the last day. And this
is the will of him that sent me, that whosoever seeth the Son, and
believeth on him, may have eternal life; and I will raise him up at the
last day.\"

**For he bears their sin.**

198\. This is again a repetition or expansion and prophetic verbosity:
Why? What is the cause? The manner or form of this justifying is that
one may know Christ crucified. The way of arriving at righteousness is
that he makes righteous by his righteousness, not by your effort.

The reason is that he bears the sins of all, for no one bears his sins.
It can also be understood of the remnants of sins; but it is better to
understand it of the whole sin. The

Remnants of sin are in the saints, but they serve them for the best,
Rom. 8, 28. If they only fight against it, sin does not harm them,
although sin is present in the flesh and not dead. Therefore we must
understand the whole sin under it. The prophet shows here a great
eloquence and verbosity to indicate that he could not sufficiently
inculcate this wonderful work of God, that the Son of God suffered for
the wretched sinners.

Finally, this passage cannot be sufficiently explained: \"He, my servant
the righteous, will make many righteous. For He bears the sin of many.\"
For it embraces the whole gospel, as in a summA, and has been very
widely treated and explained by the apostles and evangelists, and by the
true church, which made the beginning of it from the time of Pentecost,
when nothing else was said and acted upon but this passage, \"My servant
the righteous. \"2c. By faith in Christ you are righteous. The church
that confessed this article remained in faith, and faith is lighter at
one time and darker at another. He himself said \[Matth. 28, 20.\]: \"I
am with you always, to the end of the world\"; without this article the
church does not stand. Mahomet has devastated the church, and the pope
has darkened the doctrine of faith; but where this article has remained,
there God has preserved the church.

201 It is not necessary to indicate all that is written in the New
Testament. The prophet diligently inculcates this suffering of Christ,
that it was done for our sins, and yet nothing has been accomplished by
it, not even today, except in the church. He speaks most clearly, not
only of the person, but also of the cause, that he was smitten and
suffered for our sins, that he might reject all things, the temple, the
ceremonies, the law, and all human thoughts of righteousness, and that,
excluding them, we might firmly hold that through this one Eternal we
obtain eternal salvation and life, so that this chapter does not contend
both against sin and against righteousness \[works\].

722 L. XXIII, 525-S27. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
II56-II6V. 723

**V. 12. Therefore I will give him great multitude for a prey, and he
shall have the strong for a prey; because he hath given his life unto
death, and is counted like unto the transgressors, and hath borne many
sins, and hath interceded for the transgressors.**

This passage pleased our Lord Jesus Christ, and he intended it in the
Gospel, when he speaks of a strong man with armor, Luc. 11:22: When a
stronger man comes upon him, he divides the spoil. And this is a very
lovely picture.

203\. He does not speak of temporal power, as if the powerful also
belong to this victory, but the power of a lord (potentia herilis) does
not belong to this victory. For Christ does not abolish the household or
the worldly rule, but rather confirms it through the apostles, Eph. 5,
33. 6, 4.: You parents, raise your children; you husbands, love your
wives; likewise 1 Petr. 2, 13.: Be subject to the king, as your ruler,
and to the captains, as the messengers from him; and Rom. 13, 5.: Be
obedient for the sake of conscience.

Therefore, it is not necessary to think that the prophet, as the Jews
foolishly dream, speaks of a temporal kingdom and of human spoils. For
this passage has been repeated so often in this chapter: \"For the sake
of sin,\" \"for the sake of our sickness,\" \"for the sake of our
iniquities,\" 2c. And he does not say: \"For the sake of poverty, for
the sake of contempt. The sins, the death, our hell are too heavy and
impossible things for us, which can neither be overcome nor cancelled by
us.

**I will give him great multitude to prey upon (Dispertiam ei).**

205 He uses a word that is taken from warfare or the war camp, like Cap.
9, 3: \"People will rejoice before you as they rejoice in the harvest;
as they rejoice when they distribute the spoils. But he speaks of the
distribution of a great spoil and a very great booty, not only of the
kings, but also of the subjects with their princes and kings, and even
of the entire

human gender, that\'s why he uses the words xxxx, xxxxxx. Because if
there is only one

If the word \"power\" was intensiva (according to strength), he could
have used other words that mean power, might, strength. Rabbim actually
means \"great\", namely according to the quantity (quantitate) and
nature; in German one speaks, \"ein groß, mächtig Volk\", with which not
the personal strength, but the size and quantity, the strength of the
peoples and kingdoms is indicated. Thus he speaks here, Azam \"I will
bring him a great, mighty multitude.\" Likewise it is also used by
Abimelech, when he drove out the patriarch Isaac: \"Testify of us, 1)
because you became too mighty for us\" \[Gen. 26, 16.\], not of the
personal power or strength, but because he had increased and grown in
armies, in the family and in people, who adhered to him.

But the personal strength is also included. Although it says more of the
great multitude, as I have said, yet this personal strength is also
included. For he hereby looks at the devil, at the world, at sin, at
death, at the law; for we must make the victory of Christ an
all-embracing (universal) one, because he has overcome absolutely
everything that is great, strong, and many. We have an infinite number
of devils against us, sins and death, Rabbim and Azumim \[the great
multitude and the strong\], as above Cap. 9, 4. these enemies have been
described by the rod, the yoke and the staff. Here are in fact and truth
many strong and great ones, against whom Christ contends, namely not
against the worldly regiments or against the household, for these he
does not want to destroy; but he wants to destroy the works of the
devil, namely the sins \[1 John 3:8\], and even to put away the law,
although this must be understood correctly (in subtili intelligentia).
How this is done, I have explained in the 9th chapter.

\[§ 106 ff.\] He must overcome the law of God himself; as the apostle
says 1 Cor. 15, 56, because the law is the power of sin. This power must
necessarily be destroyed.

1\) Wittenberger: rsesäs sE; Erlanger: a ms nodis, while according to
the Vulgate u nodis should be read.

**724** L- xxw, 527-S29. broader explanation of Isa. 53, 12. w. vi,
ii6v-ii62. **725**

will be destroyed. For when this is destroyed, sin also is destroyed;
but when sin is destroyed, death also is destroyed; when death is
destroyed and abolished, all the power of hell and of the devil also is
destroyed. Therefore says Isaiah Cap. 49:24: Can a strong man, a mighty
man, a giant (gibbor), a Nimrod be robbed, or can the righteous man be
loosed of his captives?

The Latin translator was afraid to use the word \"the righteous\"; he
understood it above from the king of Babel \[and instead of \"the
righteous\" he put a robusto. But\] it is that \[to get rid of\] 1) what
the righteous has captured. And who can do this? It is impossible for us
to rob the devil, and to wrest from the law its robbery, and to take the
righteous tyranny which the law exercises against us, according to which
we are also justly 2) condemned; as PaUlus speaks \[Rom. 7:12, 13.\],
The law is just, holy, and good; but now that which is just has become
to me 3) something evil. Therefore, what the law does, it does with the
highest right. Who then can set free the captives whom the law, the
greatest of all tyrants, holds captive? Christ answers \[Is. 49, 25.\]:
I will save your children, namely the robbery or the booty shall be
snatched from the tyrant, and those whom he holds captive.

Isaiah indicates \"the strong\" whom he had previously called \"the
righteous\". Consequently, he does not speak of the Babylonian
captivity, but of that redemption of which he likes to speak, by which
man, the sinner, is redeemed from the law, from death and from sin; as
Paul says: \"The sting of death is sin\" \[1 Cor. 15:56\]. Here are
three enemies, which must necessarily be overcome, and when these are
destroyed, the worldly regime and the household remain, namely, the law,
the greatest tyrant of all, the

1\) Inserted by us to give meaning.

2\) Instead of: jn8ti in the editions should probably be read just\".
After that we have translated.

3\) Instead of nainnL in the editions, the Vulgate should be read withü.

Sin, and death. When these, I say, are abolished, everything remains.
The devil is the originator of sin, he has caused us to transgress; he
also has the law for himself, which is his protector (patronus) by
condemning the human race. Thus he has righteousness for himself, and
rejoices that the whole human race is also condemned by the law, because
he himself is also condemned. Who will redeem here? I,\" he says, \"will
redeem and water your enemies with their own blood. These are words of
the Lord in Isaiah Cap. 49, 25. 26.

This is how I understand the passage there. I will give him the kingdom
of the devil, of sin, of death for a prey, and he himself will
distribute everything. The Jews understand it of the Messiah as an
instrument. But Isaiah considers him to be the Lord who does the very
work that the Father himself does, that is, he himself will distribute
all the spoils, the prey of the strong. There are two personalities, but
one and the same work of him, who hands out this robbery of the terrible
and dreadful devil, of sin and death. These are great and strong for me.
I will distribute the kingdom of the world and the power of the devil;
and he himself will also distribute the booty, the victory and the
glory, because he will be called the conqueror of death, sin, the law
and all evils.

210\. Behold what a tyrant the law, sin, death is; its power is great,
the multitude of those who die and sin is infinite 2c.

Therefore, this is a different conqueror than Hercules or Theseus, who
will slay other monsters than lions and bears. Here the lions are sin,
death, the devil, the evil conscience, the charge of the law. But how
will he execute this? By dying for the sins of the whole world, and by
his death acquiring the Holy Spirit, and pouring it out on the world,
and dividing the spoils of death, of sin, of the law, of hell, of the
devil; he will deliver from the law that accuses, from the evil
conscience. But it will be such a deliverance that I will not be
frightened by the memory of all the sin, nor by the figure of death,

726 L. XXIII, 529-531. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1162-1165. 727

nor ask after the devil, but that I may also mock the law and say: Thou
law, accuse me not; I am not thy debtor or a debtor. You death, you
devil, grab yourself. Why? For the sake of my satisfaction, or for the
sake of my record? Not at all; but for his sake, of whom it is said, He
hath borne their sins; the devil, sin, and the law, which accused and
condemned, is overcome, and liberty and safety are obtained through the
Son of God, who died for me, who became a curse for me, who bore my
sins. Thus he will distribute the many spoils of this tyrant. Isaiah
constantly inculcates and diligently repeats this.

Therefore we are to learn that salvation does not come about because of
our righteousness or works that we have done, but according to his mercy
he made us blessed through the bath of regeneration and renewal of the
Holy Spirit, Titus 3:5. The apostles agree with each other on this and
treat this lesson exceedingly well.

When we hear and believe that these promises are fulfilled in this Son
of God, we receive the Holy Spirit, who makes our hearts joyful. He who
learns this has this benefit, that he may rejoice, be glad, and mock the
law and death besides: \"Death, where is thy sting?\" \[1 Cor. 15, 55.)
Then shall we divide spoils, and mock the law, saying, Thou art indeed
good, but thou shalt not accuse me. Against this the law says: Are you
not in the -sinful flesh? It is true, but I am righteous, not because I
am a child of Adam, but because Christ, the only begotten Son of God,
has borne my sins, and is wounded for my iniquity; him I set before
thee. There it must fall silent; it does not accuse him, nor does it
condemn him. Yes, the Christ, the Lord over all, has the power to accuse
and condemn the devil. For he was unjustly killed according to the
judgment of the law. Therefore he jumps back and says: \"I cannot do
anything to you, since you believe in Christ. I hear this and accept it
in faith, and by persevering in it I am saved. Because the law is so

Christ must suffer if he does what is due. 1) He is wounded, he has
suffered, he has been beaten, he has also given his life to death, and
has been counted like the transgressors, he has become a curse. Then the
law came upon his neck.

214\. Effundere animam suam in or ad mortem \[to pour out one\'s soul in
or to death\] is a Hebrew expression, like a sack being poured out, or a
vessel being poured out purely, that this is the opinion: He gave his
soul so deeply to death that not a drop of life was left; that is, it
was not a pretense of death, but he truly died, like another man; the
truth of his death is not based on false opinions, as it is said that
Mahomet did not die, but was taken away. And some heretics have
pretended that Simon of Cyrene was crucified instead of Christ; but this
person, who was the arm of the Lord, died completely and truly. These
things are not easy to believe. The heretics argue, as it has just been
said, that he did not truly die. But Isaiah affirms that the true God
and man died.

Therefore, everything (except his own sin) is actually attributed to
him, 2) which belongs to human nature, because in his most perfect human
nature he died perfectly, suffered, was scourged, and was tempted in the
most perfect way, just like us.

Thus he is also the greatest sinner, that there is none greater in the
whole human race than the Son of God, so much so that he is also called
sin itself; yes, the sin offering, the curse, the sweep offering, and,
as Isaiah \[v. 10\] speaks, the guilt offering for sin. So great a
sinner is Christ, yet so that this must be understood, not of his own
sin, but of another\'s, that is, our sin, even as he has often said
above \[v. 5.\], \"He is bruised for our iniquity, for our sin\'s
sake.\"

1\) In the editions: tzuis tarn InäiZna tacit, xutitur, vulusrutus etc.,
which seems to us to be meaningless. Instead we have assumed: Huiu
slex\] turn inäiAuu kucit, sOtiristus\] putitur. Vulnerutus etc.

2\) Instead of trikuuut, triduuntur will be read.

**728 531-533.** more extensive explanation of Isa. 53, 12. **w. VI,
1165-1168. 729**

Sin is ours, it was something foreign to him; he did not have sin, nor
did he commit it, it became his own because of love, so that he loved
us. This he bore, and for the same he suffered, as if he himself had
done it, since he was quite innocent and quite undefiled. He was the
Lamb who was foreknown from the beginning of the world, the Seed of the
woman promised to Adam and Eve immediately after the fall of our first
parents, that he should bear and take away sin, which was actually not
his, but ours; as he speaks in the Psalms \[Ps.. 51, 3. 6.\] \"God, be
merciful to me\"; \[Ps. 41, 5.:\] \"heal my soul, for I have sinned
against you\"; \[Ps. 40, 13.:\] \"My sins have taken hold of me.\"
Everywhere he confesses the sin of the whole world as if it were his;
but, as has already been said several times, it was not really his, but
it was made his own sin, namely through the immeasurable and
inexpressible love, according to which he wanted to become a sacrifice
for us.

These are such great things that the prophet rightly exclaims \[v. 1\],
\"Who believes our preaching?\" that the only begotten Son of God not
only becomes a man, but also becomes the greatest sinner instead of all
men; that all who believe in him are free from the bondage of the law,
from the supreme right of the devil, sin, and death. Therefore he was
subjected to the law, to sin, to death, because he was not a debtor, but
a Lord over them all. There the immeasurable love was poured out, which
cannot be sufficiently considered and praised by any creature.

219 Therefore he came, that he might divide the spoil, that he might
redeem many nations. And this he deserved, not only by his own power,
being righteous, but also in a righteous way and with justice, which
fell upon him, so that he condemned the law, accusing him as a sinner,
rightfully, and also redeemed us from the curse of the law, because he
stepped on our side and was joined to us. And before God he takes all
sins upon himself. So the law accuses him, and condemns him as a sinner.
But since it thought it had condemned him

and now condemned to death so that he could not escape, he rises again
as the conqueror of death and puts the law on the cross, Col. 2:14.

**And is counted equal to the malefactors.**

This is the real power of the law, that it condemns only the wicked, not
the righteous. And the son of God is counted as equal in all respects to
those who were condemned according to the law. According to the law, he
is called an evildoer, an ungodly man, an abuser of God, who sins
against the law, who is put between two murderers, and that is as much
as if he were put among all. Therefore, he is counted as equal not only
to these two, but to all evildoers. The law imprisoned him and locked
him up; so death, sin, the devil, and hell consider him an abuser of God
and condemn him as such.

But what happens? They hear the one who has risen from death say: \"I am
the Son of God, I am innocent and righteous; you deceived Adam in
paradise, I took upon myself the sins of the whole human race, and I
made myself a sacrifice for them. What right do you have over me \[,
Satan\]? I did not know that you are the son of God. But you have felt
it that I am innocent and God\'s Son; as he is forced in the Gospel to
confess him for the righteous and holy one, saying, \"What have we to do
with you?\" 2c. \[Luc. 4, 34.\] Why then didst thou kill me? I thought
you were like John the Baptist, or another holy prophet. So one master
comes upon another. There Satan and death are forced to confess: We have
sinned, we have accused an innocent person, we have killed one who has
done nothing wrong. I, Law, have counted the Son of God as equal to the
other murderers. Therefore, hear that you are condemned again, and you
must confess that an innocent person killed you, so that you have not
only sinned against an innocent person, but against the Son of God. Thus
death has killed itself, the devil has strangled himself, and hell has
robbed itself. This is it.

730 xxiii, 533-S35. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1168-1171.
731

what Isaiah Cap. 49, 25. 26. says: I will help your children, and I will
feed your enemies with their own blood. The devil, death, and sin wear
themselves out, because they are condemned before the face of God,
according to their own pronouncements and judgments. Consequently, they
cannot kill us in Christ who believe in Christ.

This victory, which is obtained through Christ, is a marvelous work in
the incarnation of Christ, which is an unspeakable gift, and such
counsel as cannot be spoken of; yet it must be spoken of, inasmuch as
faith and eternal life must be confirmed thereby.

**And he has borne many sin.**

The prophet repeats the same thing. He is numbered with the
transgressors; he is a sinner, he bears all sins, that is true; but
Isaiah says: He is a marvelous sinner, in that he is a sinner, he bears
not his sins, but those of others. Other people do not. All men are
righteous, there is no sin or death in us. The Son of God alone is a
sinner, an offender, guilty of death, under the power of the devil and
hell, and no other besides him.

224\. Therefore, we should not look at ourselves and not consider our
sins, but act as if we knew nothing about them, and turn to this special
Michael, that is, one who is \"like the Lord; In him we are to believe
and know 1) that he has borne our sins; and not only this, but also that
he has risen from death, ascended into heaven, and is seated at the
right hand of the Father, pouring out the Holy Spirit, and making all
holy and righteous, giving life and righteousness. When you see this,
you see nothing of sins; he was counted among the transgressors for us,
he rose from the dead for us.

\(225\) There is therefore no sin in Christ or in us believers. In the
flesh it has not yet been completely swept away, but it will be

1\) Erlanger: oreäirnus and seimus; Wittenberger: oreäamus and seiunius.
We have followed the latter reading.

But our head and most distinguished part is Christ Himself, in whom we
will be completely without sin and death according to the body, when the
worms have already consumed this death, sin and misery of our body.

Isaiah adds these words so that we may see that he bears the sins of
others, not his own; and that he does these wonderful works, not for our
righteousness, but for his suffering, and therefore he repeats the same
several times. And this he does not do without an important cause. For
he does it so that we may know that this was God\'s counsel, that we are
not justified by our works and virtues, not by the law, but only by
faith in this Christ.

227 Isaiah saw how the Jewish people boasted against this doctrine of
the law, the temple, the priesthood, that is why he often repeats: \"He
is broken for our sins\" 2c. We see how difficult it is in the worldly
regime with legal justice and that of the jurists, not that the same is
evil; for the law is good \[Rom. 7, 12\], but for him who uses it
lawfully. The abuse is evil because the hypocrite boasts of his
righteousness and wisdom as a thing that is valid even before God.
Therefore the prophet says \[v. 1.), \"Who believes?\" Oh how few! Not
the wise, not the righteous, not the great, but the fools, the sinners,
the tax collectors.

Thus the world seeks only its outward (formal) righteousness, and uses
it, which it has acquired by its powers, although it is also small,
small and weak; and opposes all the sayings of works, which it can only
muster, as: \"Give alms, and all will be clean for you\" \[Luc. 11,
41.\]; likewise: \"Make yourself free from your iniquity by doing good
to the poor,\" Dan. 4:24, so that she might overturn these and similar
sayings of Isaiah of Christ, and claim that her righteousnesses are
sufficient for sins; and not only for her sins, but also for the sins of
others, in that her righteousnesses swallow up the sins of the world,
like the Lamb of God.

229\. such things we have also resisted

732 um. \[ss f. 16\" f. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 54, 1. W.
vi, 1171-1174. 7ZZ

We did this by affirming that we were doing enough, first for our sins
and then for the sins of the world. We did not pay attention to those
exceedingly bright suns and shining flashes, in which it is said that
all are sinners; none is righteous, Christ alone is righteous and the
conqueror of sin. Therefore, if you want to overcome sin, look to him as
if there were no sin in the world, but to this Lamb of God who bears the
sins of the whole world.

**And asked for the wrongdoers.**

This text is also against the Jews. He has endured such great injustice,
he has not committed any sin, he is punished as the most innocent, he
has shed his blood as the most innocent, and yet, according to the
judgment of all, he is considered a rebel. This is very painful. And yet
he does not desire revenge, his heart does not think of it, he does not
curse, he does not wish that his crucifiers should be condemned or
punished for the sake of this very most heinous sin but

forgives them also this. He returned these sins to Himself, all the
sins, not only of the whole world, but also the sins of those who
crucified Him, as He tells Luke Cap. 23, 34. He says: \"Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do.\"

This is not the way of men or the habit of the world, since people die
with indignation and at least with the desire to avenge themselves. But
here the Son of God shows Himself differently by praying for His
crucifiers, as the evangelist reports. His heart is full of love, mercy
and compassion. He is gentle and serene, he wishes and thinks all good
for them. For the more they hate him, the more they rage, the more
poisonous their hearts are, the kinder he becomes in his heart toward
them. But who believes that?

232 So much for the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. Let us give thanks to
God, the Father of our Lord and Savior JEsu Christ, and fervently pray
that God will confirm in us what he has given us and what he has worked
in us. Amen, Amen.

**The fifty-fourth chapter.**

Just as the prophet described Christ as the head of the kingdom in the
previous chapter, so here he will describe his body, that is, the
church, which is oppressed, barren and abandoned under the cross. But he
comforts her and promises her great descendants.

**V. 1. Boast, you barren one who does not give birth!**

He calls the church \"barren\" in comparison with the synagogue, which
is a fruitful people, has many disciples, and is famous for the teaching
of the law and works; therefore, it is like a kingdom that is in the
highest bloom. In contrast, the church is despised, barren, without
disciples,

3\) But the reason is this, because the gospel is such a doctrine, which
is not, like

the doctrine of the law, is understood by reason, but departs from
reason altogether. For the forgiveness of sins for the sake of an alien
merit, likewise an alien righteousness, cannot be grasped by reason. And
even among the saints this knowledge is not firm enough. For even though
we reject trust in works and superstition, we cannot completely remove
it from our hearts, but it is, as it were, an inherent disease of the
flesh, which afflicts the spirit far more violently than any evil desire
afflicts the flesh. To this must be added the habit and instruction that
we were not only born to superstition, but were also made and instructed
to it under the pope. Because the gospel is contrary to this, and all
trust apart from Christ

734 **L. xxiii, 161-163. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
1174-1178.** 735

Therefore, it finds very few disciples, and it is contradicted by the
whole world. This is the cause of the barrenness that the prophet is
talking about here.

4 Furthermore, this whole passage must be taken from the abrogation of
the Old Testament, that it is a confirmation of the new people, who are
without law and live by faith in Christ; as it is cited by Paul in the
epistle to the Galatians \[Cap. 4, 27\]. For the people of the Old
Testament were inwardly bound in conscience, and were servants of sin;
but outwardly they seemed to be the very freest, and were beautifully
adorned with all manner of purities. On the other hand, the new people
are inwardly, in spirit, free and a king over all laws and over all
works, but outwardly there is nothing weaker and nothing more despised;
in spirit they have freedom, in the flesh persecution. For this reason,
glorious consolations and encouragements are needed, so that it will not
be offended by the outward appearance and despair, or think that it has
been rejected.

**For the lone woman has more children than she who has a husband, says
the Lord.**

5 This is an excellent and glorious promise, and the prophet wants us to
take it for granted, because he adds: \"says the Lord\". But it does not
only refer to the times of the apostles, but it endures to all times.
For God\'s word remains forever. Therefore, our small number and the
number and power of our enemies should not worry us today. Nor should we
be moved by the wretched reputation of the church, that with such great
diversity of opinion, with such great discord among princes and great
men, there seems to be no hope of harmony left. For although a pious
heart cannot look upon these things without great sorrow, one must not
throw away all hope on that account. For the church here has the promise
that it will be propagated far and wide.

**V. 2. Make the space of your hut wide.**

6 These are images by which he magnifies the promise. But he indicates
that the gospel will reach the ends of the earth.

and that it will not be hidden like the synagogue alone in the One
Corner of the Jewish Land.

**V. 3. Your seed will inherit the Gentiles.**

7 This is not to be understood of the bodily inheritance (for it is
unfruitful), but of the spiritual, namely through the word. This is a
clear scripture of the profession of the Gentiles.

**V. 4. Fear not, for you shall not be put to shame.**

\(8\) This means that she is close to being put to shame. For the church
is said to be in this danger,^v^ ) that she has very few children, and
all things threaten her ruin; but though there be fear, yet let her not
be afraid, because it follows:

**But you will forget the shame of your virginity.**

He calls the shame of virginity that she is without a husband and
therefore without children. You will forget this disgrace.

**V. 5. For he who made you is your husband.**

10 \[Instead of: Quia dominabitur tui, qui fecit te etc. in the
Vulgate\] translate: \"For he who made you is your husband\" 2c., that
is, you will have a husband; not Moses, not Peter, not Paul, not the
pope 2c., but the Lord who made you. Therefore, this marriage will be
followed by an uncountable offspring.

**V. 6. for as a woman forsaken and sorrowful in heart 1) 2c.**

This is the appearance of the church, and thus the glorious promises are
fulfilled, that Christ is the man of the church. Therefore faith is
necessary, which relies on things not seen, that is, on the Word alone.
Moerentem spiritu is the same as when we say in German, \"Von Herzen
betrübt.\" Thus we often read in the Gospel that Christ rejoiced in
spirit 2c.

v\) The 1532 edition has to the end of this paragraph only the words:
but not remain in it.

1\) Erlanger: uiuli\^rsrn ut instead of: ut muliererli.

**736** 2- **XXIII, 1W-I6S.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 54,
7-11. **W. VI, II78-1I81. 737**

**V. 7. I left you for a little moment.**

This is an excellent consolation, by which it is promised that the
tribulation will be short and last only a moment, which in the future
will work \"a glory beyond all measure\" \[2 Cor. 4:17\].

\(13\) But it must be remembered here that the spirit speaks. For reason
cannot believe that the challenge is only a moment and a point, but it
considers it to be eternal and infinite, because it is only attached to
the present sensation; it feels nothing, it sees nothing, it hears
nothing, it thinks of nothing, it understands nothing but the present
pain and the present evil.

\(14\) Therefore this is the spiritual exercise, that we put away all
terrors which we see, and accustom our hearts to that which we do not
see; that is, that we hold fast in faith to the word. For the word alone
teaches against our senses, and promises that the evil will not be
eternal, but only a momentary and punctual one, that I say so.

**But with great mercy I will gather you.**

The feeling of the wrath of God in the temptation, the feeling of the
tribulation is as it were the center; but my mercy is as it were the
circle (sphaera). Wrath is only a minute of time, whereas mercy is like
the whole time of eternity. But here again one must remember that this
is not a material but a spiritual circle, that is, that these are words
of faith, that if one were to follow reason and the judgment of the
senses, it would seem as if the contradiction were true, and that mercy
is the center, while wrath and the perception of evil are an infinite
circle. But this is to be applied to other things also. What are the
Turk, the pope, against Christ? Certainly that which is a point of time
against eternity. What are our heretics against the church? Certainly
that which is the center against the periphery.

**V. 9 For such shall be to me as the waters of Noah (Sicut in diebus
Noe).**

This is a confirmation by a likeness. Just as I did not leave the
promise made to Noah \[Gen. 8:21, 9:11\] unfulfilled: so also that which
I now promise will be strong and lasting. It will have the appearance of
wrath with you, but in fact it will not be wrath; just as it sometimes
rains that it appears as if a flood is coming, but the flood does not
come again.

\(17\) Furthermore, these rich consolations show us how difficult it is
to comfort and raise up a heart that is frightened by the wrath of God.
For as often as they see a single cloud rising, they immediately think
that the flood of sin will come again; that is, a slight temptation
takes away our courage, but we must increase by faith in faith \[Rom.
1:17\], and when we have been strengthened by one experience after
another, we gain an ever greater courage to despise other dangers; for
if a desperate situation did not occur from time to time, we would not
truly learn to believe. \"To hide one\'s face\" \[v. 9\] is as much as
to be angry; this is a moment, he says 2c.; just as \"to look upon\" is
as much as to be gracious and favored.

**V. 10. For mountains shall surely depart.**

18\. Your adversaries, both spiritual and physical, of whom you fear as
of insurmountable mountains, will tremble. But you, who are trembling in
your eyes, wavering and uncertain, will stand like an immovable rock.
The cause is because the mercy with which I have received you will not
depart from you, but will stand immovable over you. Therefore, only
believe my word and let go of your feelings, and you will realize that
it is so 2c. We see from this abundance of prophecy that it is just as
difficult to raise up a troubled heart as it is to soften the hard and
defiant heart.

**V. 11. You wretch, over whom all weathers pass, and you desolate 2c.**

19\. so he calls them, because the church is showered with all kinds of
misfortune, and equally-.

738 xxiii, ivs-168. interpretations on the prophets. vi, nsi-iiW. 739

As Christ is a sign that is contradicted \[Luc. 2, 34.\], so is the
church. For other doctrines and religions, however inconsistent, yet
find their disciples, and are in good peace. This religion alone is
exposed to the hatred and ravings of the world and to all sin. That is
why it comforts them: The tribulation will not only last for a moment,
but will also help to increase the church, so that the more it is
pressed, the more it will bear fruit, and the more it is restricted, the
more it will be planted. Therefore, it is also compared to a palm tree
\[Ps. 92:13\], which does not yield to the burden, but rises up against
it.

**Behold, I will lay your stones like an ornament.**

20\. This is a great promise that God will build the church as a kingdom
of precious stones and gems. But these precious stones are those of
which he will say in a moment \[v. 13\] that they are taught by the
Lord. He sets various kinds of precious stones, because of the various
gifts that are in the church. About these see Paul, 1 Cor. 12, 4.ff. and
Eph. 4, 4. ff. 2c.

V. 13. **and all your children taught by the Lord.**

These are the precious stones. Furthermore, this saying is quoted Joh.
6, 45. But he calls them taught by God because the doctrine of the
Christians is such a doctrine, which reason alone cannot find, but even
if it is found and taught, it cannot understand. And what is more, it is
necessarily forced to hate and condemn it, because it is a doctrine of
such things as are not seen, contrary to the judgment and sense of
reason. Therefore, Christians are ridiculed as asses, because they teach
about things that are nowhere and deduct from those things that really
are.

\(22\) On the other hand, worldly wisdom, jurisprudence, and all the
other arts that are concerned with action teach about things that are
present and fall into the senses. Therefore

They prefer your gospel to reason. Since reason is opposed to the
gospel, it is impossible for a Christian to be taught by men; and those
who adhere to the word do so not by their own efforts, but by God\'s
gift, and because they are taught by God.

\(23\) These are hateful people who misuse this glorious saying against
the oral word. For if the oral word is ineffective, why do they not
refrain from teaching themselves? Why do they not refrain from writing
books? Or where do they get what they teach? The prophet acts more
correctly, who connects both, the oral word and the spirit, with each
other. He calls the church a mother who gives birth to children; and yet
it is known that the church cannot give the Holy Spirit. Therefore, she
gives birth through the outward preaching ministry, with which the Lord
is, as it is said in the Acts of the Apostles \[Cap. 14, 3. Marc. 16,
20.\]: \"The Lord worked with them, confirming the word by signs
following.\" Therefore, because he says they were children of the
church, he indicates that the oral word was there. Again, because he
says their children were taught by God, he indicates that the spiritual
word is also present.

\(24\) Now these things must be distinguished: The hearing we have from
the church, the faith from the Lord; the word from the mother, the
spirit from the father; the voice from the preachers, the power and
effect from the Holy Spirit. The voice gathers us, the Holy Spirit
enlightens us and unites us with GOD 2c. Therefore, whoever has the Word
and believes the Word is a child of God, and has both the oral and the
spiritual Word. And neither can be without the other, because God has so
ordered it.

**And great peace to your children.**

\(25\) As it is written in Romans 5:1, \"Therefore, since we have been
justified by faith, we have peace with God through Jesus Christ.
Therefore, when the heart is strengthened by faith that God is for us,
it says, \"Who can be against us?\" \[Rom. 8, 31.\] Of whom shall I be
afraid? Bor

**740 168-170.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 54, 13-17. **w.
VI, II8S-II87. 741**

the world? But what is the world against God? What is the creature
against the Creator? Am I supposed to be afraid of death? But what is
death against the life that is in Christ? Or of sin? But what is sin
against the eternal righteousness that is in us? 2c. But this certainty
cannot be in the heart if God does not first teach the Word and create
peace in the heart through the Word.

**V. 14. You shall be prepared by righteousness.**

26 This follows faith: peace of heart and good works. For to them that
believe is offered, above that they have peace, also the ability
(materia) to do good, that they may teach, comfort, answer doubtful
things, serve the cities and households, pray, communicate to others,
govern 2c.

**You will be far from violence and injustice.**

27 \[Instead of: Recede procul a calumnia\] translate: \"You will be far
from injustice.\" Not that calumnies and wrongs are not present, for
they hang on the backs of Christians, but they will be removed from your
conscience. For evil only approaches the flesh, and does not enter the
conscience; but the Spirit also knows how to make use of evil, and
overcomes evil by patience. Thus he says, let not terror approach thee;
not that Christians are without fear and danger, but that no one will
harm them. For they have God for their Teacher and Father, and the
Church for their Mother; these do not let peace be snatched from us.

**V. 15. Behold, who shall rise up against thee, and overtake thee, if
they rise up without me? (Ecce, accola veniet, qui etc. )**

The grammar here is dark. However, the meaning can be given thus:
Behold, what neighbor shall come against thee, that he may

you raids, since he will come without me? He comforts the church against
the violence of the tyrants. But when he adds: \"Without me\", he
cancels the unbearable glorification of the adversaries, that they boast
that they are doing God a service by persecuting the godly; they fight
for the church and for the faith against the heretics. For this is what
they do: they adorn the violence they do to the godly with the title of
the divine name and the church. But Christ strengthens us here, and says
that they do this, but \"without me\".

**V. 16. Behold, I make it that the blacksmith 2c.**

29 He promises that this will also happen, that the heretics will
perish, who shake and shake the church far more violently than the
outward violence of the tyrants. That is why he calls them \"smiths who
blow out the fire\" to set the whole world on fire. I create them, he
says, to their work, that is, to destruction, that they perish. They
themselves will bring about their ruin 2c. Our time has produced many
such smiths, but we see that they too are created \"for their work\".

**V. 17 For all the stuff that is prepared against you.**

\(30\) He confesses that things are prepared against us, and that
tongues are set against us. But he adds, Non dirigentur, that is, they
will have no happiness nor blessing, and will perish. Thus, although the
enemies have determined many things against us, although the spirits of
the wicked have written many things against us, yet they have
accomplished nothing, but have vanished away like the wind.

**And their justice from me.**

31 For the world does not see them, but condemns them as heresy and
seditious doctrine. But I approve their righteousness and their life.

[**742** xxiii, i7o-i72. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
ii87-nso. **743**]{.underline}

**The fifty-fifth chapter.**

**V. 1. Come now, all you who are thirsty, come to the water.**

The prophet has so far taught in many chapters what Christ, likewise,
what the church fei, namely an assembly of those who adhere to the word,
not to visible things. He comforted them with various promises against
the sorrow of the cross. Now he also exhorts them to be diligent in the
word, so that they do not fall into contempt for the word or disgust
with it, which challenge is the most harmful and vilest of all, from
which all heresies have arisen.

Therefore, it is necessary that we be kept in the constant use of the
word and beware of the most harmful conceit, as if we understood and
knew the word well enough, as many imagine nowadays. But godly hearts
believe that it is God\'s Word, and that it is inspired by God through
the Holy Spirit. Therefore, they have reverence for its majesty, and
desire to be disciples always; they do not grow weary through constant
reading. Therefore, they are far from being tired of the same thing, and
every day they bring a new fervent desire for the word, from which
others, as full forests, are disgusted. Therefore, this encouragement of
the prophet is necessary, according to the teaching he has presented
above \[Cap. 54\].

The first part of this encouragement is this: Follow the gospel which is
offered to you freely, and which offers eternal righteousness freely.
All other teachings, all other righteousness, are brought about with
effort and expense, and yet are of no value.

**Both, wine and milk.**

4 This is the other price of the word by which he exhorts us, that the
gospel is a doctrine profitable for all things, that every man may find
a remedy for his need. For because in the

If there are weak and strong in the church, \"wine\" is given to the
strong, who are tormented by the temptations of sin and death, for their
comfort. But to the ignorant and weak, \"milk\" is given for their
nourishment, so that they may be instructed and taught.

**V. 2. Why do you count money when there is no bread? 2c.**

\(5\) In these words all other religions, doctrines, and works are
refuted and abolished, because all religions, all doctrines, and all
works, except this doctrine of grace, are vain, and yet laborious, which
do not quiet the heart, but afflict it. But we should note what he says
here about all righteousnesses that are apart from grace, namely, that
they are laborious and yet futile, as we have learned under the pope.

**Listen to me.**

6 The third prize is that the teaching of the gospel alone gives life.
For he says: If you do not hear me, your soul will not live. All other
teachings, all other doings kill. Consequently, the righteousness of
Moses, the righteousness of all monks, priests 2c. Death and
destruction.

**V. 3. For I will make an everlasting covenant with you.**

7 He obviously abolishes the old covenant and promises a new one,
namely,

**The certain graces of David.**

This is the covenant of grace and forgiveness of sins. For there is an
emphasis in the word \"grace,\" which he sets against all merits and
works, that we should know from it that our righteousness is a gift of
grace, free of charge.

9 But that he adds, \"the certain ones,\" by this he sharpens the
encouragement. For the

744 u xxni, N2-I74. Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 55, 3-8. W. vi.
1190-1193. 745

The fearful and weak hearts are always afraid that such great promises
(because they are offered in mere words) will be in vain and deceive
those who believe in them. So that he may counsel our weakness, he calls
them \"certain graces,\" that is, true ones, which he will keep true and
fulfill as they are believed.

10 Here one can make the contrast, and deny this statement: \"certain\"
to all other doctrines and righteousnesses, that they are not certain,
but deceive.

11\. further, so that one might not understand bodily promises of the
land of Canaan, therefore he adds: \"the certain graces of David\", so
that he might distinguish the graces of the new covenant from the graces
of the old covenant, according to which he promised the land of Canaan
to the fathers \[2 Sam. 7, 12. Apost. 13, 34. Ps. 89, 25.ff.\].

**V. 4. Behold, I have set him as a witness to the people.**

12\. Until now he has encouraged the Jews. Now he says that this grace
shall be extended to the ends of the earth. Not only you Jews shall be
made fat, but also the Gentiles. Consequently, this new covenant will
extend farther than the old. But there is an emphasis in the word
\"witness,\" for a witness is one who speaks. Since Christ is to reign
among the nations, he is set up as a witness and is to rule through
testimony, that is, through the preaching of the gospel. In this way
everything is built on the word, not on present things.

V. 6 **Seek the Lord, because he is to be found.**

\(13\) The fourth part of the exhortation contains threats, as if to
say: I have praised the benefits of the gospel to you; now, if you are
not moved by your benefits, at least be moved by the danger and harm
that will come to you. For if you do not accept the word now, it will be
taken away from you; afterwards all your efforts will be in vain. You
will seek, but find nothing; you will call, but no one will hear you 2c.

\(14\) Thus we also exhort people today to accept the present light. For
there is a danger that the word will soon be snatched away from us
again, and that there will be no certain teaching anywhere in which
people can be instructed. The Anabaptists and others are already paving
the way for this. For Satan does not sleep, and we live in the highest
ingratitude.

**V. 7: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the transgressor his
thoughts, and turn unto the Lord; and he will have mercy upon him, and
upon our God: for with him is much forgiveness.**

\(15\) The ungodly and the unrighteous are the most apparent saints, and
in sum, all those who do not keep this mercy by grace and the
righteousness of Christ. Now although this is the most lovely promise
with which he admonishes the ungodly, it is generally in vain with the
ungodly, because they do not want mercy and forgiveness, but to be
righteous. Therefore we must first do this, that we recognize the sins.
If we do this, grace will not leave us.

**V. 8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts 2c.**

16 This is a refutation of the adversaries who, when they hear these
promises and exhortations, oppose their merits and the works they do,
like the Pharisee in the Gospel: \"I fast twice a week and tithe
everything I have\" 2c. Luc. 18, 12. Here these pompous people make the
objection: Are these not good works? Therefore God answers here: These
are your thoughts, he says, but I think quite differently. Therefore,
let your thoughts go, and despair of your strength, and look to mercy by
grace, and you will attain to my thoughts, that is, to my righteousness,
by which I make you righteous by grace and for nothing. For there is an
emphasis in the word \"your,\" namely, which the Holy Spirit has not
wrought in you by the word, but which you have devised yourselves,
however good they may appear to be.

746 L. xxm, 1-4-177. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, iiM-nse.
747

17 This is a very strong refutation, by which he condemns all human
thoughts of God and of the righteousness of God; for he does not speak
of the thoughts of an adulterer, a fornicator, a thief 2c. For what
would it be necessary to condemn that which otherwise condemns the whole
world? Therefore, the distinction that God condemns only the evil
thoughts and not the good ones is inconsistent. For the thoughts of
one\'s own righteousness are very holy thoughts according to reason.
This also shows how beautifully the adversaries set up their doctrine of
free will. For God says without distinction, \"Your thoughts,\" they may
be good or evil, \"are not my thoughts.\"

**V. 9. But as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways
higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.**

He condemns all our ways, deeds, devotions, and works because they are
earthly, and demands heavenly things in exchange, that is, Christ\'s
mercy and righteousness, by grace and for free, by which alone we are
saved if we take hold of them in faith.

19 Furthermore, he does not call \"his ways\" a way of provision, but of
righteousness, by which we are to be made righteous. For it is a twofold
way. One way is ours, which man seeks and prepares for himself by his
own powers and actions. The other is the way of God, which is not
prepared by us, but by John the Baptist through the Word \[Matth. 3,
3\], so that the Lord may do and work everything in us. This is the way,
when one believes with all his heart that Jesus Christ has done enough
for us on the cross and has given us his merit. This faith is followed
by worthy fruits. But this is done in us by the Holy Spirit. Therefore,
whoever has not been imprinted by God through the Holy Spirit cannot
endure. Thus, above and beyond the virtues practiced in worldly
government and in the household, he requires a divine power, namely,
that we accept the grace that is offered and given to us freely.

**V. 10. for as the rain and snow 1) fall from heaven.**

20 The exhortation goes this far. Now he instructs the weak that they
should not be offended at the lowly character and foolishness of Christ,
who is afraid to do such great things by the voice of man. For if you
look at the word, you will not see any power in it. For the mouth of
man, not strength nor weapons, sustains this kingdom. That is why hearts
are shocked when they hear that such great things are to be accomplished
through the word. Therefore the price was necessary, which he treats in
a suitable simile, by which he attributes everything to the word. That
the earth brings forth fruit, the glory is not to be ascribed to the
earth, but to the rain and snow. In the same way, the Word works in us
to make us fruitful and do good works, after we have been justified by
trusting in the mercy that the Word presents to us.

**V. 11. So shall the word that proceedeth out of my mouth be: it shall
not return unto me void, but it shall do that which I please, and it
shall prosper when I send it.**

21 Therefore let us follow this word, and the Holy Spirit will also be
given to us, who will be powerful in us.

Furthermore, the word \"mouth\" is not to be taken for an invisible
mouth, but the mouth of Christ is the mouth of Peter, Paul, and all
those who speak the word of God. It is impossible for the church to be
without the word, and the word without the church.

\(23\) The fact that he says, \"He shall prosper when I send him,\"
indicates that the word will bring righteousness and salvation to us.
But this does not happen without trial and the cross. That is why he
added: \"He shall prosper.\" As if he wanted to say: As much as he is
resisted by the world, by Satan, and by your conscience, he will still
succeed.

1\) In Latin: nukes instead of: Beekeeper st nix in the Vulgate and in
our Bible.

**7\^8** XXUI, N7-I79. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 55, 12. 13.
W. **vi,** nss-E. **749**

**V. 12. For you shall go forth rejoicing.**

24 He alludes to the exit from Egypt. I will bring you out in joy from
the new Egypt, from death, from hell, from sin, and from troublesome
righteousness, into the kingdom of grace and forgiveness of sins, that
you may have everlasting joy in the Spirit. Before, when you were under
the law, everything was full of sorrow and trouble, because the heart
was not at rest; but now, through faith in Christ, you shall have peace
and joy.

\(25\) But we can see from our joy the lack of our faith. For as
strongly as we believe, so strongly must we also necessarily rejoice.
But this joy is in tribulation, that though we feel sins, want,
persecution, 2c. yet we say, What do I ask? I have Christ; the One is to
me instead of all the treasures of the world, as we read of a Roman
citizen who, when deprived of his goods and driven into misery because
of faith in Christ, said, \"At least Christ you will leave me! To him it
seemed during his bodily affliction \"as if all the mountains and hills
were rejoicing before him with glory.

**V. 13. Firs shall grow for hedges, and myrtles for thorns.**

26\. there will not be left in the church vexatious and unfruitful
hedges and thorns; that is, the unfruitful and harmful statutes of men
will be eradicated. There will not be sorrowful consciences, but useful,
fruitful and tall trees will grow up. There will be useful people and
many good works in the church. Furthermore, all this happens through the
rain, that is, through the Word.

**And to the Lord shall be a name and an everlasting sign, which shall
not be cut off.**

27 Christ\'s name is this, that he should be a Beatificator, justifying
by grace and freely, condemning all our works, and giving us his works.
Where this name and this teaching is, there is a sign of Christ\'s
presence. The Augustinians, Franciscans, Dominicans and others have lost
this name 2c. because they have something else by which they want to be
blessed, namely their rule and their vows. But this name of Christ shall
be eternal, which the gates of hell shall not cut off, as it is written
in the Christian creed: \"I believe one holy church\" 2c.

**The fifty-sixth chapter.**

In the beginning of this chapter, Isaiah acts as a minister of the law,
exhorting the people to the righteousness of the law, so that through
the law, as through a disciplinarian, they may be prepared for the
future kingdom of Christ. In the rest of the chapter, he comforts those
who had come from the Gentiles in his time that they should not consider
themselves aliens from God\'s people, and promises them that even though
they were not of the seed of Abraham, God would still accept their
sacrifice and call them more.

**V. 1. Keep the law and do justice.**

2 These are words of the law. He says: Be devout in this discipline of
the law and

righteous until Christ comes. But herewith he touches the two pieces of
righteousness, that they should both preserve the innocent and condemn
the guilty.

**For my salvation is near.**

3\. he promises the future of Christ. But one must notice that he
distinguishes his righteousness and salvation from the legal
righteousness and salvation. For there is an emphasis in the pronoun
\"my.\" For the righteousness of the law is a childish and servile
righteousness, by which we learn to hunger after the righteousness of
GOD. Thus he connects faith and fear. For this is why he promises the
righteousness of God, so that he may bring the people

750 xxm, N9-I8I. Interpretations about the prophets. W. vi. nss-iM. 751

from reliance on works, and at the same time keeps them in the
righteousness of the law, so that they will not be made worse by
licentiousness.

**V. 2: That he keep the Sabbath.**

On the Sabbath day they refrained from work for the sake of worship.
Therefore, under the name \"Sabbath\" he understands all that which we
owe to God, that is, the first table of the Ten Commandments. Again,
when he says: \"And hold his hand, that he do no evil,\" he includes all
the works of love, that is, the other table.

V. 3: **And the stranger who has gone to the Lord shall not say.**

This is the most important passage in this chapter. For they that were
converted from the Gentiles doubted, and thought that their labour in
the religion of the Jews was vain, because they had no promises, and
were not of the seed of Abraham. These thoughts of their timidity are
beautifully indicated by the prophet: Who knows whether I please God?
\"The LORD will separate me from his people\" 2c. For this speech is the
speech of such a conscience that feels sin, death and condemnation.
Therefore the Holy Spirit comes before them and says: You are not
separated; believe that you are united with this people 2c.

6\. the little word \"not\" should be written with golden letters, and
we should imprint it deeply in our hearts, who doubt God\'s grace. For
such thoughts of despair are not God\'s, but Satan\'s thoughts. But the
one who can grasp this \"not\" in his heart at the time of temptation is
blessed.

**And the blender shall not say.**

\(7\) This may be understood by those who were cut in the letter, or by
a secret interpretation that it means proselytes, who were barren among
the people. For this was a curse of the law, if someone left no seed.

**Behold, I am a barren tree.**

\(8\) Though I do many things in this religion, yet my conscience tells
me that I am a dry tree prepared for the fire.

**V. 4. and firmly grasp my covenant.**

9 Namely, the promised Christ.

**V. 5. 6. and a better name.**

010 Such sons as these, though they be not of the seed of Abraham in the
flesh, yet will I prefer them unto the unbelieving Jews, which are of
the people. As if he wanted to say: I would rather have a believing
servant than an unbelieving son, according to the saying \[Deut. 32,
21\]: \"I will provoke them on that which is not a people\" 2c.

The foolish papists have misused this passage to praise chastity. But
not only widows and virgins are chaste, but also married couples have
their chastity, and that the very purest. And as for righteousness or
merit, neither are husbands preferable to virgins, nor virgins to
husbands. For the states of human life are praiseworthy, but
righteousness is in Christ alone, not in the species of life. Secondly,
the prophet is not speaking of the praise of virginity, but is
comforting the barren of the blessed that they should not despair of
their profession, and he is speaking expressly of those blessed who keep
the Sabbath and hold fast the divine covenant. Therefore, he is not
speaking of the praise of the circumcised or of virginity; but of the
praise of those who keep the commandments. Cornelius, in the Acts of the
Apostles, was better than many Jews; but it does not follow that he was
better than others because he was a man of war. So one must judge also
from this place. For the status does not make us Gods pleasant, because
it belongs to the worldly regiment and is an external thing, but the
observation of the divine commandments.

**V. 7. These I will bring to my holy mountain.**

\(12\) The Gentiles who have come shall also have a part in this
religion and promise, and because they believe my promises, therefore
their sacrifices shall be acceptable to me.

**For my house is called a house of prayer to all peoples.**

13\. this is the reason why those who are cut off and those who are
converted from the Gentiles have given him

752 **xxm, isi-184.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 56, 7-12.
**W. vi, 1203-1207.** 753

because this service is not given to the Jews alone and they are not
God\'s people alone, but because it is a house of prayer for
[all]{.underline} nations \[1 Kings 8:43, Matth. 21:13\]. So also before
the birth of Christ it had to be fulfilled what was promised to Abraham,
that he should be a father of many nations \[Gen. 17, 4\].

**V. 8. 9. All the beasts of the field, come and eat.**

14 Hitherto he comforted the desponding and godly hearts; now he turns
to the other part of the people, to the proud and defiant, who thought
they were so gathered that they could not be scattered, because they
were of the seed of Abraham. These he scares with threats that they will
be devastated by the Assyrians and other neighboring nations. For it is
a prophecy of the calamity to come.

15 He calls the Assyrians and Persians \"animals.

**V. 10. ii. All their watchmen are blind.**

The cause of the future calamity is that the law and the word have been
lost. Even the princes of the people, he says, and the teachers, who
should teach others, do not do their office, they are \"dumb\" and yet
\"strong dogs\", they only serve their belly, otherwise they do nothing.
This is a beautiful description of the false prophets, that they know
nothing and are dumb dogs, that they are lazy, stingy, and given to
indulgence. Such people are nowadays the pillars on which the papacy
rests; therefore it is no wonder that it is so beautifully defended.

**Each one looks to his own way.**

\(17\) This may be understood of the outward vices. But I like it more
to be taken from the apparent ways in which the hypocrites walk. Thus a
Franciscan follows the rule of Franciscus; he is not concerned about the
Ten Commandments and the teaching of the Gospel, as if it were a common
thing that belonged only to the rabble.

**V. 12. Come, let us get some wine.**

18 These words are spoken in imitation. As if he wanted to say: You
search with

Their teachings and life are nothing other than that they may be fat
bellies and live gloriously. For I do not think that one must look for a
secret interpretation here. We see this also in our papists, who live in
the greatest indulgence and the highest licentiousness. Some years ago
it was a disgrace to keep a whore at home; nowadays they take even the
wives by force without any shame. Thus it has gradually happened that,
having fallen from godliness, they have fallen into hypocrisy; then from
hypocrisy they have fallen into avarice, and from avarice into
licentiousness, so that nowadays neither their teaching nor their life
is to be praised.

Cap. 57, 1**. But the righteous perishes.**

19\. Those lazy bellies, he says, pay no attention to the righteous; but
the. The righteous have a gracious God who will give them peace and a
pleasant rest from calamity.

20\) \"Before the calamity\", that is, before God destroys the wicked by
an extraordinary calamity, as He says to King Josiah \[2 Kings 22:20\]:
You will be taken away, so that your eyes will not see all the
calamities 2c. Thus the apostles and the rest of the saints were
snatched from the destruction that came upon Jerusalem, but the ungodly
multitude was gathered into one heap and suffered the punishment. It
will be the same for us. There are still some godly people living
everywhere, for whose sake God is postponing the punishment. But when
these will be gone, the fall of Germany will follow.

**Before the misfortune (A facie malitiae**).

\(21\) It will be clearer if it is translated thus: Before the calamity
comes, the righteous will be taken away and will come to peace and rest
in their chambers, because they have walked rightly. Now this is a
glorious saying, which comforts us that after death we shall rest
securely in peace, since we shall feel no adversity. But how or where
this will happen is not for us to know. For it is enough to know only
this, that it will be a peaceful rest.

[754 L- xxm. 184-186. lequnaen on the prophets. W. vi, 1207-1210.
755]{.underline}

**The Fifty-Seventh Chapter.**

1 This is a general punishment of hypocrites and of those who go against
the word. For he condemns the works saints and idolaters for sinning
against the first commandment. First, in that they choose a place other
than the one commanded to them by God. Secondly, that they put their
trust in their own works and in the carnal arm, and despise the true
God. Therefore, he threatens that at the time of their misfortune all
their deeds will not help them.

Then he adds the opposite, and comforts the godly. The godly have all
good things superfluous; now if they should fall into misfortune, God
will help them, comfort them and refresh them. Of the righteous, he
says, I have said that they shall be carried away from calamity; but you
the wicked shall not be so. For you will be kept for calamity because of
your ungodliness. Just as if we wanted to punish our tyrants: Come now,
ye slay the holy ministers of the word; with sword, and fire, and water,
ye persecute the limbs of Christ. But it shall come to pass, when ye
have put them out of the way, that ye yourselves also shall perish, and
be damned for ever.

**V. 3. And you, come near, you children of the dialler, you seed of the
adulterer and the harlot.**

3 Our adversaries have almost only this single accusation, which they
raise against us, that they say we are blasphemers, and know nothing
else but that we utter invectives against the pope and the princes.
Therefore, learn to make a distinction among invectives. For this is not
a swearword unless it is spoken by a person who should not speak it,
that is, by a private person who is not in public office, just as it is
not a death blow when the authorities kill people, but when it is done
by a private person. Thus

The prophet here utters the harshest invectives against the synagogue
and the people of God, calling them children of an adulteress. And he
could have been reproached, as we are: Who then are you, that you revile
the princes of the people, and the chief teachers? Truly, they are not
all evil, though there are some among them 2c. ^w^) But the prophet is
excused, first, by his teaching and preaching ministry, which is meant
to punish, and second, by his intention to correct the people. For he
does not do it to disgrace the Jews or to avenge himself for a wrong he
has done, but so that they will recognize the sin and return to the
right path.

4 But here he accuses only the sins committed against faith, not the
outward vices, and acts against those who in appearance were the most
holy and devout, not against the gross malefactors, whom also reason and
the world condemn. For this is why he calls them \"children of the
dialler and adulterer,\" that is, of the synagogue, because they had
confidence that they were righteous by their works, which they
themselves chose. For diurnal election is a deceit, and adultery is
ungodly. ^x^)

Therefore, all the doctrines and religions other than the doctrine of
faith, which praises the mercy of grace in vain, is a diatribe and
sorcery, and all the teachers who deviate from the sound faith are
sorcerers, and even bewitched by their own opinion.

**V. 4. In whom then will you have your pleasure?**

\(6\) This shall be the glory of the word, and of the ministers of the
word, that they shall be accounted a mockery and a laughing-stock, and
shall be rejected by the

w\) Before the following the edition of 1532 has: But you should notice
here that although these are the very hardest swear words, nevertheless
Isaiah does not sin. For it excuses 2c.

x\) Instead of H5, the 1532 edition has: Dergleichen sind alle
Menschenlehren und Satzungen.

756 xxin, 186-188. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 57, 4-10. W. vi.
1210-12 n. 757

Wise men of this world are pulled through. Furthermore, if Isaiah
suffered this, what wonder is it if we too must endure such things today
from the godless world? \[Instead of super quem lusistis in the Vulgate,
translate in the future tense: In whom will you now have your pleasure?
As if to say, My prophets, whom I sent to teach you the right way, you
have had for mockery, but when misfortune shall overtake you, then you
shall see whom you have mocked.

**V. 5: You who run in heat to idols.**

7 \[Instead of: Qui consolamini in the Vulgate\] translate better: Qui
ardetis, \[you who run in heat\] namely with love against the idols,
like the animals when they are in heat. And here he enumerates their
ungodliness. You sin twofold, he says, against the first commandment,
both by choosing other places and leaving the place that God has
appointed for you, and by putting your trust in these works of your own
choosing and not in your God. For this is the manifold adultery that He
punishes.

\(8\) By the word \"running in fervor,\" he has appropriately depicted
the nature of the hypocrites, since they are very fervent in their
idolatries, just as under the papacy there was a tremendous fervor and
zeal in building churches and distributing alms. Now that the true
religion is taught, and people are properly instructed about good works,
everyone is extraordinarily cold.

**V. 6. Your essence is on the smooth brook stones.**

9\. translate In partibus torrentis pars tua: \"Your being is at the
smooth brook stones\", that is, your pleasure, your joy, your life.
Those who thus despised the temple which was appointed to them by GOD
for worship, they also slaughtered their children by the brooks, and in
the places which they had chosen for themselves. But this happens as a
punishment, so that those who do not give Christ a penny when they are
asked for it, freely waste all their wealth for the honor of the devil.

**Should I take comfort in this?**

\(10\) Here he makes the judgment: \"Works chosen by myself in this way
do not reconcile me, however great they may be, but only provoke me the
more to anger and offend me. Add to this the devotions of the monks, the
vows, the masses for the living and the dead, the indulgences, the
pilgrimages, the pardons, the fasts 2c.

**V. 7. You make your camp out of a high lofty mountain.**

11\. camp or bed he calls the practice of idolatry and idolatry itself,
objects of worship and altars.

**V. 8. and behind the door and the post you put your memory.**

12\) \"Memorial\" is the place where they worshipped their idols. As
with us, so with them there were special altars in almost every noble
house.

**You love their camp where you first see them.**

13 \[Instead of: Dilexisti stratum in the Vulgate\] can be translated
more appropriately like this: Diligis cubile eorum ubicunque videris,
that is, where you find a comfortable place, you choose the same for
your idols.

**V. 9. You burn oil for the king.**

14 \[Instead of: Ornasti te regio unguento\] translate like this: You
went to the king with oil, so that you might make a covenant with him.
Here he remembers another sin against the first commandment. This is how
it goes: those who have once fallen away from the sound faith fall from
one error into another. Before he condemned trust in one\'s own
righteousness and works; here he condemns trust in men. Thus, trusting
in works is followed by trusting in men.

**V. 10. You worked yourself to pieces in the multitude of your ways.**

He punishes the miraculous rut of the saints of works in their deeds. In
the true religion, however, everything is cold.

758 L. xxm, 188-1V. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1214-1217.
759

**But because you find a life of your hand, you do not grow weary.**

16\. you despise my ways, you have invented other ways of life according
to your hand; in these you continue diligently, as it were in senseless
lust for human help.

V. 11. **Before whom are you so careful?**

\(17\) The hypocrites and the saints of works not only do not trust in
God, but they do not fear Him, but they fear their idols and the
statutes of men, as it is said in the 53rd Psalm, v. 6: \"But they fear,
because there is nothing to fear. Thus a monk causes himself great grief
that he does not change his shepherd and his rope, that he does not pray
his Horas, over which he has no command from God 2c. But that he
blasphemes God and neglects his neighbor does not even occur to him.

**So you deal with lies and do not think about me.**

18 These are very harsh words of reproach, that he calls all their
worship \"lies. And he demands only this, that they should remember him,
that he is kind, merciful. But you do not do this, he says, because your
heart is full of thoughts of idols and trust in men.

V. 12. **But I will indicate your righteousness.**

19 This is a threat: Your righteousness, on which you now rely so
surely, I will put to shame by the word. Then your idols will not help
you, nor your works. All these will be scattered like dust blown by the
wind. Thus we see that in adversity there is nothing more despondent
than the saints of works, while in good days there is nothing more
defiant than they. But there is a special emphasis in the pronoun
\"yours,\" as if to say: My righteousness is firm and everlasting, yours
is not.

V. 13. **f. If thou shalt call, let thy multitudes help thee.**

20 That is, your idols, your righteousness, and your works, of which you
have made many.

**He who trusts in me will inherit the land.**

21 Now he turns to the godly and comforts them. Let it come to pass that
those who believe in him may remain in the true church, abounding in
both bodily and spiritual goods, that they may also teach and save
others.

V. 14. **And will say, Make way.**

22 \[Instead of: Et dicam\] translate in the third person: \"And will
say.\" Those who trust in me, he says, they alone will be able to teach
others rightly. First they will say, \"Make way,\" that is, they will
punish the world for sin, and show that there is not yet a way with men;
that the impulses must be removed from the way, namely, reliance on
works and other self-chosen doings. This teaching is not understood by
those who do not believe.

**For thus saith he that is high and exalted, who dwelleth for ever,
whose name is holy; who dwelleth on high and in the sanctuary, and with
them that are of a contrite and a humble spirit; that I may quicken the
spirit of the humble, and the heart of the contrite: I will not always
contend, nor be angry for ever. 2c.**

This is the other part of their preaching, with which they restore the
hearts that are frightened by the contemplation of their sins through
the promise of grace. You feel the sins, you feel the wrath of God.
\"The LORD is near to those who are brokenhearted,\" as it is said in
the Psalm \[Ps. 34:19\]. Therefore, do not despair, for the Lord wants
to dwell with those who are brokenhearted and humble; he hates the
defiant and the secure 2c.

\(24\) When he adds, \"I will not always be angry,\" he admits that he
is angry, but it is an anger that lasts only a moment. If we now bravely
persevere in the faith of grace, \"a spirit shall move from his
presence,\" with which he will warm and refresh us.

V. 17. **I was angry at the iniquity of their avarice.**

25 He gives the reason why he will strike them. Because he sums up both,

**760** L. xxm, **I9I-IS3.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 57,
17-20. W. **vi, 1217-1220. 761**

Threats and consolations, and treats the threat of future calamity in
such a way that he still leaves some hope of peace. For it is through
the scourge that the foolish are brought back to the right path.

26 But he beautifully connects avarice with trust in works. ^y^) For
hypocrisy and mammon are two idols joined together.

**I hid myself and was angry.**

\(27\) It is far more difficult for God to hide than to strike. For when
people in misfortune do not have the word of God (for that is \"to
hide\"), then each one attacks God with his deeds and works. So did
Ahaz, so did Saul, who took refuge in the soothsayer and in his
sacrifices. But those who have the word first recognize that they have
earned even far greater punishments for sin, and ask for salvation
because they believe God, who has given them His promise. Finally, they
also amend their lives and do good to their neighbor.

**V. 18. But when I looked at their ways.**

\(28\) These are our merits by which we deserve mercy, namely, our
misery and misfortune, that we err in our doings, and have need of the
mercy of God, without which we must perish.

y\) Instead of the preceding from § 25, the edition of 1532 offers: This
is the reason why he wants to strike the wicked, namely for the sake of
the vice of avarice, and not only for the sake of avarice.

**V. 19. I will create fruit of the lips.**

29\. translate like this \[instead of: Creavi fructum\]: I will make
wide lips to say: Peace, peace to him who is far away 2c. ^z^) The lips
are called wide from the word, which is propagated far and wide. For it
is a way to heal and redeem when God sends His word. This happened at
that time, when peace was proclaimed under the reign of Cyrus, and the
Jews were restored to their land. For he speaks of the punishment of the
Babylonian captivity. Paul made Eph. 2, 17. out of this special
(particulari) saying a general one. He says: Just as he proclaimed peace
to all Jews and Gentiles in the time of Cyrus, so he has come now 2c.

**V. 20. But the wicked are like an impetuous sea.**

030 The godly, saith he, shall have peace through the word: but the
wicked despise the word, and will not have peace in mercy, but in their
own righteousness. But because without the word there is no comfort in
adversity, they will be troubled and wearied with their doings, and will
always have a troubled conscience. For then they will feel that all our
works, all human righteousness, is rubbish.

z\) The 1532 edition continues here like this: This is the way to heal,
namely through the word. This is 2c at that time.

**The fifty-eighth chapter.**

\(1\) In the foregoing he punished sins against faith; here he attacks
the fruits of unbelief and the outward vices which were hidden under
their hypocrisy. For these are the two most important things, that first
faith should be taught, and then good works. Now the Jews not only
omitted the commandments of the first tablet,

but also those of the second tablet, because of the superstitious works
of human statutes. And this is what they are reproached with here.
Therefore, he condemns the trust they placed in their fasting and lists
the sins that were hidden under this fasting. Then he teaches what true
fasting is, namely to practice works of love, and adds

762 xxni. iW-195. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 1220-1224. 763

He adds excellent promises for good works. Finally, he also rejects
their Sabbath, and teaches what is, to keep the Sabbath. But he also
adds a glorious promise to this piece.

**V. 1. Shout confidently, spare not, lift up your voice like a
trumpet.**

2\. he indicates what the trumpet meant in the Old Testament, namely the
sermon.

This is an excellent passage against the hypocrites, who choose seeming
works, fasting, walking sadly, 2c., and yet are full of avarice,
cruelty, lust, and other passions. The cause is this: because when one
has departed from the faith, the hearts must necessarily be taken over
by the devil, who then covers these hidden vices with the appearance of
works, and makes men puffed up with the vain hope of holiness.

**V. 2. They seek me daily.**

\(4\) He says, \"Not only do they fail to obey the first commandment,
not only do they not obey the commandments of the other table, but after
they have completed their fasts, they rightly challenge me, wanting to
know the reason why I do such and such, since they deserve nothing.

**They rightly challenge me, and want to get right with their God.**

As it is said in the Gospel \[Luc. 7, 35\]: \"Wisdom must be justified
by her children. Not that they do this openly, that they want to be
right with God, yes, they even boast themselves of the service of God
and their obedience to God, but they are right with God when he speaks
to them through the preaching of his word and punishes them through it;
and this God, who speaks to them through the godly, they deny and
reject. For they reject the word, they also reject the ministers of the
word, who punish vain superstition; against these they boast of their
righteousness, and so they right with God.

**V. 3. Behold, when you fast.**

5 Here he adds the reason why he rejects their fasting. For since he
says: \"So

you do your will,\" he indicates the contrast. As if he wanted to say: I
wanted you to do my will, but you are fasting to cover your will and
your sins, which are greed, avarice, contempt and cruelty. So today the
monks and priests of the pope cover their very grave sins, namely,
persecuting the word, killing the innocent, blaspheming Christ 2c., with
their apparent works, that they say mass daily, pray much, live
celibate. Therefore, he does not condemn fasting outright, but he
condemns such fasting, which was made into a cover with which they
covered their evil will and set it against the will of God.

**V. 4. Behold, ye fast, that ye strive and quarrel.**

\(6\) In your fasting you are devout, but with your neighbor you deal
most cruelly. For, as he wrote: Vera justitia compassionem, falsa autem
indignationem parit \[true justice inspires compassion, but false
justice inspires anger\]. Examples are before our eyes today. For the
adversaries who so fiercely defend good works are very vengeful and very
cruel people, who deal by day and by night with nothing but how they may
judge us, and secretly lay snares, and how they may do us the greatest
harm. But it is a misery that they are so blind that they do not
recognize this hidden vice themselves, but must first be taught against
it; and yet it is not yet recognized. For with their cruelty they
pretend to zeal for justice, and of their tyranny they say they are
doing God a service. But for this service they will receive their reward
from the devil.

**Do not fast as you are doing now, so that a shout will be heard from
you on high.**

7\. a cry, namely about you. For he indicates that the poor who are
oppressed by the saints of works through violence and injustice cry out
to God; as it is said about the blood of Abel in Gen. 4, 10, and above
Cap. 5, 9.

764 xxiii, iW-I97. Brief Interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 58, 5-9. W. vi,
1224-1227. 765

**V. 5. Was this supposed to be a fast?**

\(8\) Here we see how far the holy papists differ from the Jews, whom
the prophet is here chastising. They put the main part of their religion
in outward gestures: they walk sadly and hang their heads like a rush.
This is a very beautiful simile. In a rush there is nothing solid,
nothing strong; the surface is exceedingly thin and smooth. The
hypocrites are also completely like this: from the outside they have a
good appearance, but inside there is nothing solid or thorough.

**That a man should lie on sackcloth or in ashes.**

9\. sack means a lowly garment; ashes a miserable sitting, according to
the custom of this people.

**V. 6 But this is a fast that I choose: Let go which thou hast joined
with unrighteousness.**

10 That is, let go of those whom you have bonded through injustice and
avarice, namely, your debtors.

11\. Furthermore, it should be noted in this passage that no fasting,
nor any other works, however holy and good they may be, are pleasing to
God if the duties of love are omitted. Therefore Christ says in the
Gospel \[Matth. 22, 39.\]: \"The other commandment is equal to the
first: You shall love your neighbor as yourself.\" Likewise \[Matth. 5,
24.\]: \"First be reconciled to your brother, and then offer your
gift.\"

**V. 7. Do not deprive yourself of your flesh.**

\(12\) This is a strong exhortation to good works. For he calls his
neighbor not a brother, not a father, which are the nearest grades, but
\"our flesh,\" which we are to care for and help when it suffers; we are
not to nourish it for pleasure and lust. In the same way, lazy people
should not be helped, but forced to work.

**V. 8. Then your light will break forth like the dawn.**

\(13\) These are excellent promises, that the merciful will have
abundance of all kinds of goods even in this life; as it is said \[Luc.
6:38\], \"Pray, and it shall be given you.\"

14\. \"Light\" means bliss, peace, well-being 2c.

**Your righteousness will go before you.**

1.\]. Good works will strengthen your conscience. Your conscience will
bear witness that you have not injured anyone. Thus good works establish
our calling and election, as Peter says \[2 Ep. 1:10\], and free us from
the conscience of evil works among men. For we are not dealing here with
the doctrine of justification.

**And the glory of the Lord will take you.**

From this testimony of your conscience and from your works, you will
certainly be assured that God is well pleased with you and approves of
your works. Thus, a godly mother knows for certain that if she does her
duty in educating the children, this work will please God. Thus, the
glory of works consists in the fact that we can say with a clear
conscience: I know that this work pleases God. For the glory of faith is
another, which says: I know that I am righteous by grace alone 2c.

**V. 9. Then you will call, and the Lord will answer.**

17 He also promises certain help in the tribulation. For the prayer of a
man who walks by faith is answered without fail.

**So you do not throw anyone complaining to you.**

18 In these words he makes the promises great. Just as he exhorted to
good works in general \[vv. 6-8\], so I understand this especially of
the preachers of the word, with whom they treated unkindly.

19\. \"If you will not have anyone complain to you,\" that is, if you
stop using my pro-.

766 L. XXUI, 197-199. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 1227-1231.
767

phets, and deal evil with them. Likewise, if you will stop \"pointing
fingers,\" that is, ridiculing my servants and persecuting them with all
kinds of shameful speeches.

20\. \"And you will let the hungry find your heart,\" that is, if you
satisfy him, your light will rise in the darkness, that is, you will
have an abundance of all goods. For it is a promise of happiness, and of
a good conscience.

**V. 11. And the LORD will satisfy your soul in the drought.**

21 \[Instead of: Implebit splendoribus\] the Hebrew says, \"He will
satisfy your soul in drought,\" that is, you will be abundantly
comforted in adversity.

**V. 12: And by you shall be built up that which is waste.**

You will not only be comforted, but you will also be happy in everything
you do. You will help many, benefit many, and be the cause of many very
good things, not only in *private* but also in public 2c. This is how
Naaman the Syrian sustains his people \[2 Kings 5:1\].

**And will lay foundation that will remain for and for.**

You will do such things that will be beneficial and lasting, whether in
the worldly government or in the church.

**And shall be called: He who fences the gaps.**

24\. \"A fence\" means, to speak in the manner of the Hebrews, the
remnant. You will be useful to all, both to the churches and to the
communities you will order. Thus is a godly man tried, and fitted for
all good work \[2 Tim. 3:17\].

**V. 13: When you turn your foot away from the Sabbath.**

\(25\) Just as he punished the fasting of the Jews before \[vv. 4, 5\],
so he punishes their Sabbaths here, adding what it is,

To keep a true Sabbath, namely, to abstain from our works, whether they
are actually evil or good in appearance, which we choose ourselves
without God\'s word; such were the masses and other ungodly services on
our Sabbaths. And the Sabbath is praised when the Word of God is
preached and diligently heard. For in this one duty lies the service of
God, that we hear God\'s word diligently, and obey it by faith 2c.

026 Now mark, that the sabbath day is polluted by the works which we
ourselves choose: for he rejecteth our foot on the sabbath day, that is,
the works which we have chosen, and also our will and our ways.

**For thus shalt thou praise the same, if thou doest not thy ways.**

\(27\) What could have been more clearly said than that the Sabbath
consisted in abstaining from the things that pleased thee, even from
speaking, and sanctifying the Lord in the works which he commanded? But
the wicked do not believe that the Sabbath is defiled by works and
services of their own choosing, but as if they were blind, they persist
in this opinion, thinking: I do this work with a good intention, and it
pleases me; therefore God must also necessarily approve of it, and it
must please Him 2c.

**V. 14. Then you will delight in the Lord.**

\(28\) This is a good promise, but the wicked despise it as well as they
despise the threats. For he promises that it will come to pass that we
will delight in all that God commands and does, that we will be well
pleased with the teaching of the gospel, and that we will thank God for
having brought us to this knowledge, that we know what it is to have the
Sabbath and not to keep it. And we can comfort ourselves in adversity,
so that we can patiently endure whatever comes our way. These are
tremendous gifts.

[768 **L. XXIII, 199-202.** Short Interpretation On Isaiah, Cap. 59,
1-6. **W. VI, 1231-1235.** 769]{.underline}

**The fifty-ninth chapter.**

In this chapter, the prophet answers the wicked who attributed the
present calamity not to their sins but to the word of God, just as now,
after having begun to teach the word of God, everything is burning with
discord and murder. Now the wicked, who are hostile to the word, say
that the gospel is the cause; and they see only this, that the world is
oppressed with calamity. For their sins they do not see, nor the utter
ingratitude of persecuting God\'s word, which in truth are the cause why
God hastens His chastening or calamity.

But God is wont to do so: as often as a calamity is imminent, he sends
his word beforehand, as a messenger of the calamity, so that the wicked
may be invited to repentance, and the godly may learn patience, so that,
strengthened by the word, they may be able to endure in the future
calamity, and not, as the wicked, overcome by the calamity, succumb.
Thus before the flood of sin was Noah, before the destruction of
Jerusalem Christ and the apostles; and now, in our time, before the
future of the Turk, and before the dreadful day of judgment, Germany has
been given the clean gospel.

The order of this chapter is as follows. He says that the cause of the
present tribulations is not his teaching, but the sins of the people,
and adds a list of the sins and the punishments for them. Finally, he
comforts the pious and adds the promise that these tribulations will
come to an end, not because of any merit of the people, but because God
has had mercy on them; as it is said in the 79th Psalm, v. 9: \"Lord,
forgive us our sins for your name\'s sake.

**See, the hand of the Lord is not too short.**

4\. although God would like to help you 1) and He could, but your sins

1\) Erlanger: Vo8 instead of: vos.

stand in the way, that he cannot do it. For the prophet sees the
grumbling of the people, who fasted, sacrificed, and observed holidays
in their time of need, and yet felt that their misfortune was growing
daily. They blamed the cause of this on Isaiah, just as even today the
adversaries blame the cause of the present troubles on us. Here it is
necessary for the godly to cry out: \"The hand of the Lord is not too
short\"; the fault is not in us, but in you, who resist the word and
have no new one over the exceedingly great sins you commit daily. Repent
by recognizing your sin and asking for mercy, then God will be with you.

**V. 3. for your hands are stained with blood.**

5 This is a register of sins. The first one is that they are killers.
For they have killed the holy prophets, even as ours kill the ministers
of the gospel today.

**V. 4. There is no one who preaches righteousness.**

6\. they do not teach the righteousness of God, but their own. The same
he denotes by the word \"judge\". So he rejects both, the teaching and
the life. Because these two pieces are connected with each other.

**With misfortune they are pregnant, and give birth to trouble.**

\(7\) This is what the hypocrisy and righteousness of the flesh do. They
appear to be pregnant, but they give birth to a ridiculous mouse. For
however much a monk labors, all his doings and works are in vain,
because he trusts in a vain thing and in the vain idol of his heart.

**V. 5. 6. they hatch basilisk eggs.**

8\. this image is a stab at the doings of the hypocrites, such as Matth.
3, 7. viper-breedings

770 **k. xxm, 202-204. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
1235-1238.** 771

are called. For no one judges and condemns others so harshly as those
who are devoted to human deeds and works. For by hypocrisy they cover
their poisonous judgments and bitter hatred, and justify themselves as
if they were not guilty of these vices. Therefore the prophet puts this
poisonous nature on them. What do you do, he says, with your teaching
but hatch basilisk eggs? That is, your teaching makes the most bitter
\'people who know nothing but to judge, slander, and persecute others.
If you do not understand this, look at the examples of today. The holy
fathers in the monasteries, and the highly respectable (eximii) doctors
in the high schools become almost executioners of the pious. And so is
the whole papacy; and yet they never repent of this cruelty, but keep
their masses and their ungodly services quite safely, in order to gain
for themselves some praise of holiness.

**And act cobweb.**

\(9\) Their works shine and have a great appearance of holiness, but in
reality they are cobwebs, that is, poisoned and useless works. For as
the cobwebs look somewhat like a web, but are not fit for clothing, so
the works by which, as ungodly men think, righteousness is brought
about, are vain and useless. But the hypocrites will be preserved in the
divine judgment by their works, just as he will be protected from the
wind and the cold who would wear a garment made of cobwebs. It is a most
excellent picture.

**Eat from their eggs.**

\(10\) If anyone accepts their doctrine, he is lost, for it is ungodly
and false. If someone accuses it, they begin to rage and rage, and seek
how they may destroy him. For this is what he means by the words, \"If
you trample it, an adder will come out.\"

**V. 7. Their feet run to evil.**

11 These are their glorious virtues. But this is how it goes: the holier
someone is without the faith

the more merciless and cruel he is against the faithful. Such hypocrites
can do nothing else but kill, condemn, judge, slander, and surpass all
executioners in cruelty. The reason is that they think they are doing
this out of zeal for righteousness. Therefore, while others are slow to
kill others, and kill, either because they have been provoked to it by
their passion, or have been carried away by it, these run, they do not
crawl; and that of their own free will, since no one compels them to it
but their insatiable cruelty and diabolical hatred. That is why Christ
and John call them vipers \[Matth. 3, 7. 12, 34.\]. But we seek by the
Spirit and the grace of God not to destroy them, but to save their body
and soul; but they will not.

**V. 8. They do not know the way of peace.**

\(12\) They do not know the way to peace, since they are frightened by
misfortune or by the judgments of God. But the way of peace is this:
that without merit, even with the greatest fault, one believes in the
mercy of the Lord, as the 55th Psalm, v. 23, commands: \"Cast your
concern on the Lord. But it is a great thing to set up thus, and to walk
apart from oneself in a strange righteousness, which one neither sees
nor understands, but hears in word alone. All that is apart from this
way is corruption and terror of the conscience.

Therefore, notice that the saints of works and all those who have
departed from the sound doctrine cannot be certain of what they are
doing, but their conscience is always trembling, and in uncertainty they
waver to and fro. Nevertheless, they challenge those who disagree with
them and try to bring others to their way by death and other tortures,
on which they themselves live with an evil conscience.

**V. 9. Therefore, justice is far from us.**

14 Here he adds a lamentation. But it seems that this speech was given
at the time when the king of Assyria devastated Judea. But it is natural
that this is the case:

772 **L. XXIII, 2N4-206. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 59, 9-16.
W. VI, I238-I24I.** 773

When misfortune strikes, hearts turn to religion. That is why they
complain here that through so many doings and works with which they
toil, they neither become better nor have it better. \"We wait for the
light,\" they say, that is, we think that our fasting and our other
deeds should avert the present misfortune; but nothing comes of it;
likewise, \"We grope like the blind,\" that is, we soon make this or
that attempt to remedy our misfortune; but this also deceives us.

\(15\) Thus, this passage contains nothing but the lamentations of a
people who have been abandoned by divine help and who are struggling to
preserve and save themselves by their own strength and efforts. But
because they do not believe in God, all their efforts fail.

**V. 10. We grope after the wall like the blind.**

\(16\) This can be understood by conscience, but I would rather take it
away from the punishment that in distress many attempts are made, which
all fail.

**We bump into each other at lunch.**

\(17\) Though they have the word of the prophets, for that is the light
of the day, yet they forsake it, and turn unto other things.

**V. 11. We are all growling like bears.**

18 When the wicked see that their attempts are in vain, they become
angry and grumble. This is the attitude the prophet wants to express
here.

**V.12. For our transgression before you is too much.**

19 This is the cause of the calamity. The Lord could and would help us;
but he allows us to be given away because of our sin.

20 This is what happens to us when we want to pray. For if we are to
pray for the state of the church, our prayer first of all prevents the
raging and cruelty of the adversaries, who violate the word in the
cruelest way.

Then, the negligence of princes and of those in public office; thirdly,
the unbridled insolence of the mob, which is so great that it hardly
seems to have been so great at any time. Then we sin, each of us without
measure, in our offices, and in all this no one repents. These things
truly hinder our prayer, that we pray with doubt. For it seems as if God
will not hear us in the face of such great wickedness of the world; and
yet one should not despair. But we feel that we are being separated from
God because of our sins, as the prophet says here.

**V. 14. That is why the law also receded.**

\(21\) We do not punish our sins or the sins of others, nor do good to
anyone through good works.

**Because the truth falls in the alley.**

Those who preach the word of God purely and loudly will be killed.
Nothing but human fools are taught publicly.

**V. 15. That there is no law.**

\(23\) No one condemns and punishes sins; indeed, they justify and
defend them as if they were righteousness, just as now the papists do
not repent of their tyranny and cruelty.

**V. 16. And he sees that there is no one there.**

24 \[Quia non est vir\] is a Hebrew way of speaking. For the Hebrews use
the word vir for a pronoun, as Ps. 80,^1^ ) 18.: Confirmasti virum
dexterae tuae \[thou hast confirmed the man of thy right hand\], that
is, \[thy hand be\] 2) over that which is in thy right hand. So here it
means \"that there is no one\", as much as, there is nothing for the
sake of which God can be gracious to the people.

1\) In the editions erroneously: I\^sal. 78. The Vulgate reads: 14ut
uauuns tun super viruiu üexterue tuuo, et super tüiuiu üouuuis, \^ueru
eouürmasti tilü.

3\) Added by us for the sake of easier understanding. It seems to us
that also here the relation is deficient.

774 L. XXIII, 206-209. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I24I-I24S. 775

**That is why he helps him himself with his arm.**

25 Now he adds a consolation for the godly. The world has many wicked,
and deserves to be turned upside down. But I am mindful of my mercy; for
my name\'s sake, not for the sake of any righteousness they have (for
these are nothing), I will help my own. So now he spares Germany, so
that he does not subject it to the Turks and other enemies, that his
arm, that is, his word may help, which is nowhere else so pure and so
loudly acted. And Christ, whose name is attacked, defends himself
without taking our sins into consideration.

**And his righteousness sustains him.**

26 This is what restrains him, so that he does not pour out his wrath on
us, because he is merciful, and therefore he does good even to the
ungrateful.

**V. 17: For he begets righteousness.**

27 Namely, to strike down the enemies of his people and to destroy the
king of Assyria. For here, too, he looks at the attitude of those who
pray, who are hindered by their sins. As if he wanted to say: You feel
your sins, and therefore you despair of help; but I will deliver you.
And though the adversaries have just cause against you, for ye are very
great sinners, and have deserved these punishments, yet on that account
they shall not destroy you; but I will redeem you for mine own sake, and
not for yours. For I am righteous and keep my promises faithfully.

**V. 18. Yes, he will pay for the islands.**

\(28\) All this must be understood by the outward enemies of the Jews.
But this passage teaches us that in the afflictions which our sins have
earned, this is the only way of praying that the Lord will look to his
name and to his word, not to our sins. Such is the prayer of Daniel and
many of the Psalms.

**V. 19. That the name of the Lord may be feared by the downfall.**

\(29\) The Lord will do all these things to defend himself and to spread
his name throughout the whole world.

**V. 20. For to those in Zion a redeemer will come.**

30 Paul uses this saying in a different way, Rom. 11, 25. ff. But here
it is a general saying, as if he wanted to say: As often as God takes
away a present misfortune and redeems His own, He does it through the
word. Therefore, Paul, according to his custom, makes a special one out
of the general saying, and applies this saying to the case of the
synagogue. As if he wanted to say: I recognize that the Jews are fallen
and blinded, but they are not yet completely rejected. For they have the
promises and the word. But as long as the word will last, so will the
redemption. The Gentiles will be added to the rest, and so they will all
become Israel.

31 For when he says, \"It will come,\" this is not to be understood of
the future of a person or a new Savior, but of the spiritual future of
the Word and the Spirit. As long as the word will last, he says, so long
will also the redemption of Israel last, namely that some will be
converted all the time. But it is already enough for the fulfillment of
the scripture that at least some Jews are converted from time to time.
If anyone wants to follow Paul\'s opinion here as well, he must draw
this entire chapter to the redemption of Christ and to the blindness
that befell the Jews at the time of Christ.

**V. 21. Covenant.**

32\. Christ\'s Passion and the New Testament.

**My Spirit, who is with you.**

From this passage, Paul astutely deduces the redemption of Israel, that
it should not be completely lost. Because the word of the gospel remains
in the world, the spirit must necessarily remain as well. But the spirit
is followed by faith, faith is followed by the fruit of faith and the
cross, the cross is followed by calling, the calling is followed by the
calling, the calling is followed by the calling.

**776** L. xxiii, 209-2H. Brief Interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 60, I. W.
vi, 1245-1248. **777**

But salvation will follow. Thus, at all times, some will be converted.
This is the article: I believe a holy church, and it agrees with what
Christ says \[Matth. 28, 20.\]: \"I am with you always, to the end of
the world.\"

34\. but it must be noted that this is the church and this is the true
seed, where the Spirit of God and the Word are; the Spirit of God is
first in the one who teaches, but the Word is first in the one who
hears.

**The sixtieth chapter.**

\(1\) We have often remembered that the office of the prophets is
twofold, the one to exhort, correct, and punish the people of their
time, which is the preaching of the law; the other to prophesy of the
future kingdom of Christ.

2 Since the prophet has acted as a preacher of the law in several
chapters, he now turns again to the preaching of the gospel, and
prophesies of the future kingdom of Christ or of the church, and says:
\"A great light is coming,\" that is, the word of the gospel of Christ,
who suffered and was crucified for us, \"which enlightens all men who
come into this world,\" \[John 1:9\] both Jews and Gentiles. But he adds
how this light is so quickly spread among all, namely through the
ministry of preaching. Therefore, the church is multiplied to an
extraordinary degree, it grows and is adorned. Those who join it are
preserved; those who do not join it perish. After that he also adds the
promise that it will happen that also those will come to the church who
have persecuted it. Therefore, in this chapter he does not speak of
anything else but the church.

3 But it is a glorious prize of the gospel that he calls it \"a light.
For where the gospel is not, there is no knowledge of sin. Where there
is no knowledge of sin, there can be no righteousness. Where there is no
righteousness, there is no life. Where there is no life, there is death.
Where there is death, there is sin, hell and the devil. And that he
says, \"Arise\" (surge), means that through Christ we are raised from
the dead, from hell, and from sins.\'

rise to life, glory and righteousness.

Therefore, it is the greatest things that human reason cannot
comprehend; it even resents the fact that such a great treasure is
enclosed in the sound of the mouth. Therefore, the prophet uses a
somewhat strong word: \"Arise,\" he says, \"let not the despised figure
of the word endure you; do not be offended by the fact that so few
follow the word; do not be deterred by the inconsistency that it offers
righteousness without works by faith alone. For these three things make
the gospel despised.

**V. 1. for your light is coming.**

There is an emphasis in the word \"your\". As if he wanted to say: The
gospel is \"your light\", not only because it is promised to you, but
because you alone will follow it. For all others hate it by nature and
abhor it.

**And the glory of the Lord rises upon you.**

6\. \"The glory of the Lord,\" that is, the eternal things and
treasures, the eternal righteousness, wisdom 2c.

Furthermore, these glorious praises contain a secret encouragement that
we should listen to the word of God diligently and with the greatest
eagerness, and learn to despise everything that is splendid, precious
and famous in the world in comparison with the gospel. For in the Gospel
all divine treasures, yes, even the Godhead, are offered to us, so that
we may become God\'s children 2c.

778 xxm, 2ii-2i4. Interpretations about the prophets. W. vi, 124S-12S1.
779

**V. 2 For behold, darkness covers the earth.**

\(8\) He makes the matter great by comparison. As if he wanted to say:
Look at all the others who do not have this light; they are nothing but
\"darkness\" and \"obscurity. But we must notice here that he calls that
darkness which the world admires as suns, namely the righteousness of
the flesh, the laws, both divine and human, all the deeds and works of
men. For although the kingdom of the world is also an important kingdom,
it is nothing when compared with the kingdom of Christ, which pours out
upon us through the gospel all that there is of divine goodness. But it
must be remembered that this must be taken in spirit and in faith. For
in the sight of the world there is nothing more contemptible, inferior
and harmful than the teaching of the Gospel.

**He who rises above you is the Lord.**

9 Not Moses, as before. For the gospel offers Christ Himself as our
righteousness, salvation and redemption. The words are simple, but
greater than a human heart could grasp. For we hardly understand the
firstfruits.

**V. 3. and the Gentiles will walk in your light.**

10 Here he abolishes the whole Moses and spreads the holy people beyond
the borders of the synagogue. The law was limited in certain ceremonies
of this people. But this light will spread further. Therefore, it must
necessarily be a different teaching than the teaching of the Law had
been. It is not a light of the Gentiles, and yet he says that the
Gentiles will walk in it.

**V. 4. These all gathered come to you.**

11 These words indicate that the gospel will be proclaimed throughout
the world. Therefore, this cannot be understood in the letter, fleshly
way.

**V. 5. The crowd by the sea.**

12 Thus he calls the multitude of the heathen who inhabited the oerter
by the sea and the isles of the midland sea.

**V. 6. Midian.**

Midian is toward the Red Sea, and Ephah is a part of happy Arabia. But
it indicates that it will happen that these peoples will come to the
church through the preaching of the gospel.

**They will all come from Saba.**

\(14\) Although they did not all believe, the gospel came to all of
them.

**They will bring gold and incense.**

\(15\) I take this to mean in general, that is, they will use their
wealth to help the church. This general statement also includes the wise
men from the east, Matth. 2, 1. 11.

**And proclaim the praise of the Lord.**

\(16\) This is the sacrifice of Christians, namely, praising God,
confessing the gospel, and teaching others. Otherwise, we cannot repay
God for His good deeds in any other way.

**V. 7: All the herds of Kedar.**

That is, \"Kedar\" also uses his wealth to help the church. However, he
calls them \"herds\" because the Arabs were devoted to cattle breeding.
For \"Kedar\" and Nebajoth are parts of Arabia.

**They shall be sacrificed on my pleasant altar.**

The altar is Christ; the priests are those who teach the gospel. These
kill and slay all that is glorious in the world, the righteousness and
wisdom of the flesh. For the gospel punisheth all for sin. According to
this we are especially, each one for himself, priests, in that we daily
slay our old man, as Rom. 12:1 is said. This passage clearly contains
the abolition of the sacrifices of Moses and the whole law.

**For I will adorn the house of my glory.**

19\. as Paul says, \"your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit who is in
you\" \[1 Cor. 6:19.

**780 L. XX111, 214-216.** Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 00,
7-10. **W. VI, 1251-1254. 781**

adorned with various gifts of the Holy Spirit, such as a good
conscience, as well as the ability to teach, comfort, punish, and remind
others.

20\. Furthermore, this adornment of the Christians is so covered with
sins, shame, contempt, and other things, that it cannot be seen by the
ungodly, as it is written, \"The ungodly does not see the glory of the
Lord\" \[Isa. 26:10\]. For the ornaments of this house are very
spiritual, and cannot be seen with carnal eyes, namely, man is afflicted
with sin, with meagerness, with shame, with blasphemy 2c. Thus Christ,
hanging on the cross among the murderers, is also a house adorned with
the most beautiful ornaments, but hidden, and very much concealed from
the eyes. For through this ugly form of his, in which he hangs there,
shines the highest patience, the highest love towards us, the highest
obedience towards his Father, the life given, the death killed, the hell
made empty. Thus, in the most extreme hardships, Christians are showered
with light, with life, with righteousness, and are, in a sense, gods.
But if one follows the outward appearance, they seem to be devils.

**V. 8. Who are they that fly as the clouds?**

The prophet joyfully bursts into a very sweet question. Dear God, he
says, how great will be the power of the Gospel? how quickly will it
penetrate and pass through the whole world? We prophets are hidden here
in a corner, as it were, but at the time of the Gospel One Apostle will
fill the whole world.

22 He compares the apostles to \"clouds\" because of the power and fruit
of the word. He compares them to the \"doves\" because of the fast run
in which they fly \"to their windows\", that is, to their people, where
they find listeners.

**V. 9. The islands are waiting for me.**

\(23\) This is the cause of the gospel\'s running, namely, that the
troubled consciences thirst for this doctrine, on which they can safely
and surely rely, as has happened to us.

is because we were oppressed by the tyranny of the Pabst, and because
our conscience was constantly troubled in our very hard efforts and
work. Thus says Christ \[Matt. 11:12\], \"The gospel suffereth violence,
and they that do violence unto it snatch it away.\" For the gospel is a
word of life and righteousness; therefore, if it is to bear fruit, it is
necessary that it have a suitable workshop in which these things can be
practiced, where sin and death are.

**Together with their silver and gold.**

\(24\) I take these words in the same way as above \[§15\], that they
will feed and maintain the church with their wealth. And this they will
do \"to the name of the Lord\"; not for their own glory, but to give
thanks to God; not to obtain righteousness thereby, but for the
testimony of their gratitude. Thus he distinguishes the church from all
other religions, which do everything for the sake of their own name. But
the Church alone praises the name of God both by doing and by suffering,
and does not look to merit, for it is already righteous beforehand.

**V. 10. Strangers will build your walls.**

The church will grow, even against the will of tyrants. Thus Augustine,
Hilarius and other strangers have rendered exceedingly great services to
the Church. For \"the walls\" of the Church are not wood and stones, but
good shepherds and bishops who take care that the Church is fortified
with the word of God against the heretics.

26 In adding, \"And their kings shall serve thee,\" he speaks not of the
bodily servitude with which the Roman Pontiff subjected kings and
princes to himself, but of the spiritual servitude that kings will obey
and believe the gospel, which proclaims forgiveness of sins to the
afflicted and threatens death to the unbelieving.

**For in my wrath I have smitten you.**

So far he has described the church as it is from within and in spirit.
Now he also describes the outward appearance, namely that it is clothed
with a garment, which is

782 xxm, 216-21p. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1254-1257. 783

\"The wrath of the Lord\" means, so that the world says: This people
does not have God. For this is the foolishness of God, wherewith God
deceiveth the world, and putteth to shame the wisdom of the world. For
it is not seen that the church is holy, but it is believed that it is
holy. But this is the wisdom of Christians, that we can believe that we
have forgiveness of sins and a gracious God, under and in the midst of
wrath itself, and that we thus keep the word in the most severe
temptations, and do not let it be torn from our hands and hearts,
however much Satan and the world rage against us.

**And in my mercy I have mercy on you.**

28 He opposes mercy to wrath. I have smitten thee,\" saith he,
\"according to outward appearance, but in fact and in truth I have had
mercy upon thee. For the cross, with which I hurt you, seems to be a
wrath to you. But I come before thee, and remind thee that I smite thee
not because I hate thee, but that I may multiply thee, that I may have
mercy on thee, and that I may have the greater opportunity to have mercy
on thee. As if to say, If I do not strike you, I cannot have mercy on
you. For without temptations there is no place either for mercy or for
grace. But when we see ourselves abandoned by all help and human counsel
in temptation, only then can faith prove its strength by praying, by
demanding, by hoping from God. Apart from the challenge, however, faith
and the word are idle.

**V. 11. And your gates shall always be open.**

29 He promises the highest security, that although the Church is in the
midst of her enemies, nevertheless her \"gates\", as in a safe city,
\"are always open\".

\(30\) But this is to be done that \"the power of the Gentiles\" may be
brought to it (for so it must be read), that is, the multitude and
multitude of the Gentiles. For the church is always concerned with
converting others to the faith and calling them to repentance. In the
same way, every single Christian is always ready to teach others, to
absolve them from sins.

to comfort. For this is indicated by the open gates. Here in Wittenberg
we have a gate of the church, through which some enter daily and are
gathered to the body of the church. Similar gates are also found in
other cities from time to time.

\(31\) But the wicked do not see this blessing of the church; they only
see the punishments and the sins, and that weakness of the church which
is attached to its flesh and blood, and which cannot be completely
removed in this life, but is finally removed by death. But since we see
that even Christ did not keep the multitude of his apostles so pure and
clean that there were no sins in them, and that even the angels in
heaven, the most excellent creature, have fallen, what wonder is it that
we also fall and err at times? Only we have to get up again from the
error and from the fall. This happens when we recognize guilt, refrain
from sins, and feel that we are sanctified by Christ\'s righteousness
and are justified before God 2c.

**V. 12 For whatever nations or kingdoms will not serve you, they shall
perish.**

In the Gospel, Christ connects the remission and retention of sins with
each other \[Matth. 18, 18\]; similarly, in the institution of baptism,
he connects salvation and damnation with each other \[Marc. 16, 16\]. In
the same way, the prophet indicated through the open gates that the
forgiveness of sins is offered to all. But of those who do not want to
accept it, he says that their sins will be retained and \"that they will
perish.

\(33\) Here we see the reason why there have always been such great
disturbances in response to the gospel, through riots and wars, and
great changes in the rulers, which the godless world ascribes to the
gospel, but falsely. For this happens through the guilt of those who are
lost, namely because they persecute the gospel. For here we see that the
sentence has been pronounced: it will happen that all enemies of the
gospel perish. Therefore, if they cease to be enemies of the gospel,
they will also perish with the gospel.

**784 L. xxin, 219-221.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 60,
12-17. **W. vi, iM-iMo. 785**

of the believing church. For so it is decreed by God that whoever will
not enter shall be punished.

V. 13. **The glory of Lebanon shall come to you.**

34\. that is, everything that ever had excellence in the synagogue comes
to the church, as, the testaments, legislation, promises, fathers,
Christ, righteousness, life 2c.

V. 14. **who oppressed you** (filii eorum, qui te percusserunt).

35 This is a Hebrew way of speaking. Thus they say: A son of death, that
is, one who will die. So also here: The sons of the beaters, that is,
those who have beaten you and persecuted you.

V. 15: **Because you were the abandoned and hated one.**

The church is such a church when it is severely afflicted for the sake
of teaching and preaching. For with the word she provokes the world and
the prince of the world, Satan, against her.

\(37\) This passage should be diligently noted, for it contains the
article that the church shall remain until the end of the world, and
what is more, that it shall remain glorious and in the highest joy. But
if one looks at the outward appearance of the present church, one should
rather judge the contradiction; and yet it is true what the Holy Spirit
promises. Paul and the apostles complain that they are a sweep offering
of the world \[1 Cor. 4:13\]. Nowadays they are \"the splendor\" and
\"joy for and for\", and the Church reveres and praises them, and holds
them in honor. It is the same with the holy martyrs. The same will
happen to the Church today. For the Holy Spirit does not lie.

V. 16. **That thou shouldest suck milk from the Gentiles.**

38\. This is as above \[v. 9. ff.\]: You will be kept by the Gentiles as
children are kept by their mother. They will give you all kinds of
labors of love and that with willing heart.

zen. He ninth \"milk\" and \"breasts\", not swords and crowns of kings,
and the kingdoms of the world, but labors of love that they will render
to the church, that they will give sustenance to the faithful, protect
them and help them up.

**That thou mayest know that I the Lord am thy Savior, and I the mighty
one in Jacob am thy Redeemer.**

39 With this he indicates that the church is trapped in its outward form
and is in ruin, therefore he promises to be its savior and redeemer.

V. 17. **I will bring gold instead of the ore.**

40 That is, from the church, which is despised and worthless, I will
make a very glorious one.

**That your rulers should teach peace.**

The preachers in the church will teach both inward and outward peace,
both divine and civil righteousness. But this preaching will also be
followed by fruit. No injustice will be heard in the church; they will
be calm of heart, both toward God and toward men. They will also praise
God and thank Him for so many and such great benefits.

These promises are being fulfilled today, that we may see and know it.
For the consciences are soothed by our gospel. But the papists plague
the consciences with their teaching. We also teach public peace, that
people should obey the authorities, that one should spare one\'s
enemies. But the adversaries have nothing in mind but to kill us, to
start one war after another, and to disturb the public peace. We also
teach civil righteousness, that is, truly good works, which each one
performs in his profession, so that each one, as father, mother,
servant, maid, 2c., does his duty. These works do not teach and praise
the adversaries, because they are common works, and do not fall into the
eyes, but they only deal with self-chosen works of their orders,
clothes, prayers 2c.

786 L. XXIII, 221-223. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1260-1263. 787

**No more iniquity shall be heard in your land.**

There will be calm and quiet souls in the church. Outward peace will
also follow from this. Salvation and praise will also occupy its walls,
so that it will be safe from the onslaught of devils and heretics.

**V. 19. The sun shall no more shine upon thee by day.**

44 This is an excellent passage in which he distinguishes the kingdom of
Christ from the kingdom of the world. This city, he says, these walls,
these gates, of which I speak, cannot be seen by the shining of the
physical sun, but another sun is required if one wants to see the
church, namely the gospel. When this penetrates the heart with its rays,
then you see and feel that which I have so gloriously promised of the
church. If you now feel that you are despised, afflicted, oppressed by
sin, remember that you are not in the kingdom of the world, but in the
kingdom of Christ, and that not this, but another sun shines upon you,
namely Christ, your Lord. Thus he reminds us that he is speaking of the
spiritual light, and of the invisible sun, by which the hearts are
enlightened through faith, so that we should imagine and form in our
hearts things quite different from the present, so that we may also keep
those things which are neither seen nor felt.

Therefore, this passage serves to help us understand that the kingdom of
the church is something quite different from the external worldly
regime. There one must close one\'s eyes and cling to the invisible rays
that Jesus Christ suffered for us, sits at the right hand of God,
protects and governs us 2c. But it is another, visible sun, according to
which reason governs this outward life. In the same way, Ecclesiastes
makes a distinction between physical and spiritual things, indicating
that he is speaking only of worldly things, when he says: \"I looked at
all the things that are done under the sun, and behold, they were all
vain. 2c. \[Eccl. 1:14.\]

**But the Lord will be your eternal light.**

46 As if to say, I speak to you of the spiritual kingdom. Therefore, if
any calamity overtakes you, do not despair because of it, but remember
that it is not this sun of the world that shines on you, but the Lord,
and that you are in another kingdom 2c.

**V. 20. Your sun will set no more.**

47 He adds this to make the promise great. This invisible sun, by virtue
of which we see another kingdom and other things, is not such that it
should last only for a time. So also the things of which I speak are not
only invisible and spiritual, but also eternal. But our heart is much
too narrow to grasp and reach them. That is why we have to keep only to
the word that promises these things, since we see in a dark word what we
will experience after this life \[1 Cor. 13:12\].

**V. 21. And thy people shall be the righteous.**

\(48\) This is a clear passage, that all who are in the church, that is,
who believe in Christ crucified, are righteous. But it must be
determined here what kind of righteousness this is. For if you look at
the lives and customs of Christians, you will find many things that will
offend you. They often sin, they often err, they often become
fainthearted in small matters out of weakness, all of which seems to
contradict justice. Therefore, righteousness in the sight of God does
not consist in doing or suffering this or that, but in being enlightened
by the Holy Spirit, and in recognizing and knowing that Jesus Christ is
our Savior, who has redeemed us from death and sins through His death.

This righteousness is offered in the word and accepted by faith alone.
This faith applauds the word and believes it is righteous through death
and the merit of Christ.

But this faith is not an easy thing. For without divine power it is
impossible to believe the gospel. And also

788 **L. XXIII, 223-22\".** Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 60, 21.
**W. VI, 1233-126\".** 789

Those who have already received the Holy Spirit cannot keep this faith
without the greatest effort. The reason is this, because this
righteousness is an invisible thing that we should not feel, but only
believe. But because our flesh is corrupt, and often falls into sins,
hearts cannot without great trouble be raised up to believe, against the
present sense of sin, that they are righteous, not by their own
righteousness (for this is nothing with so many sins and so great
weakness), but by Christ\'s righteousness, who was made righteousness
for us therefore, and was sufficient for our sins on the cross, because
it was impossible for us to keep the law \[Rom. 8:3, 4\].

Therefore, our heart must be accustomed to know that its righteousness
is apart from Him and rests on Christ. For how else will it be able to
stand in the judgment of God, since we are always sinning? Therefore, if
you have sinned, and your conscience bites you, faith must be firm, and
through Christ overcome sin, saying, Though I have sinned, yet am I
righteous, because I have the light, the Lord Himself, because I have
Christ, I say, who is not guilty of sin.

52\. But that Christ\'s righteousness is your righteousness, of this you
have the most important testimonies. First, the word of God Himself,
which says that Christ died for you. Then you have holy baptism. For we
were baptized into his death \[Rom. 6:3\], which he endured for us. You
also have the sacrament of the altar, in which he affirms with clear
words and an outward sign that his body was given for you, that his
blood was shed for you.

This, then, is our righteousness, by which we are justified in the sight
of God; this is far beyond us and beyond all our works and thoughts.
Therefore, we deceive ourselves if we think that we are righteous or
unrighteous because of our works. For we are to believe and confess that
we are righteous by trusting in the death of Christ. Those who do not do
this do Christ wrong, and think that their sins are greater than death,
and that they are righteous.

is the innocent suffering of Christ. Likewise, they deny the Word of God
and the Sacraments, the signs of grace.

54\. Even though this is true, you are right to say that you are a
sinner as far as you and your old man are concerned. For as much as
flesh and blood is left in you, so much sin is left in you. But because
you have been baptized and enlightened by the Word, you are truly
righteous according to this new man. But just as baptism, the sacrament
of the altar, the Word of God, even Christ Himself, are such things that
are apart from you, so also is your righteousness apart from you.
Therefore, the private sins of our flesh cannot cancel it. For the
prophet says: our sun is eternal; therefore also our righteousness is
eternal, and shall not be overcome by temporal sins. It is not arrogance
if someone says that he is holy and righteous. Indeed, if you were to
say the opposite and think in your heart that you are not righteous, you
would be denying Christ and blaspheming Christ\'s name, who gave himself
for us so that he might be our wisdom, our righteousness, our
sanctification and our redemption (2c., 1 Cor. 1:30).

55\. Here one should make the contrast: consequently, all who do not
have this light are unrighteous, darkness and gloom, even if they give
off a great shine with their apparent works and their honorable way of
life. Therefore they will perish from the earth \[v. 12\]. On the other
hand, the godly who have this light will inherit the earth kingdom. Thus
we see that the kingdoms, principalities, and sects will be changed and
perish. But Christ will have his disciples and his church forever, as we
say in our Creed, \"I believe one holy church.\" But he adds, what will
be the manner of duration.

**Than which are the branch of my planting.**

\(56\) I, he says, will be the gardener who builds this garden. Here we
see the reason why the sects necessarily perish, because they do not
have this gardener. Likewise, one sees why the gospel and the church
must last until

790 L. XXIII, 226-228. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1266-1270. 791

to the end of the world, against the raging of Satan, the world and the
heretics, because God builds the church.

**V. 22. From the smallest shall be a thousand.**

Thus the church was first established by the apostles, which has spread
to an infinite multitude. Thus, the individual faithful pastors convert
many to the faith every day.

**I, the LORD, will hasten to do this in his time.**

This is added because of necessity. For since God has included these
rich promises in the mere word, they are not believed by the weak hearts
at the time of the cross, if they are to suffer death or some other evil
for the sake of confession, of faith. Therefore comfort us

God, saying, \"I, the Lord, will hasten these things in His time.\"
Therefore, we must close our eyes, so that we do not look at the outward
appearance, but rather keep to the word, and in hope of the promise,
suffer death, or whatever other adversity we may encounter, and learn
that God is not a liar. This is how John Hus and other holy martyrs
died.

\(59\) And in such dangers, when one has to go to death for the sake of
confession, it is easy to see that faith is a very difficult thing,
which can in no way be compared to the trivial things in which the
adversaries place the epitome of their blessedness, such as fasting,
rules, etc. Therefore, the way of life must be left to the authorities,
the parents and the jurists, but faith belongs to the theologians.

**The sixty-first chapter.**

In the previous chapter he described the body and the kingdom; now he
describes the king and the head itself. But since the essence of
religion is that we know Christ well, we should be all the more
commanded to read this chapter. Under the pope we were miserably
deceived by ungodly opinions, since in all sermons Christ was presented
to us as a terrible judge, and the Virgin Mary was put in the place of
the true Christ, so that she should be a reconciler. The prophet does it
quite differently. For he describes Christ very precisely, who he is and
what his offices consist of, and adds excellent promises for the church.
Therefore, these passages can serve as consolation in the temptations;
indeed, one must take consolation from them alone.

**V. 1. The Spirit of the LORD LORD is upon me.**

2\. by this word: \"the Spirit of the Lord\", Christ separates Himself
from all fleshly things.

Kings and priests \[Luc. 4, 18\]. On the other hand, he attributes all
divine works to himself, that he makes everything alive, that he fills
everything, that he moves everything. Here is no sin, here is no death,
here is no devil, but the kingdom of God. Thirdly, he affirms his
calling in order to strengthen the weak hearts, so that they may believe
that Christ promises and does everything according to the will and
command of God the Father, so that we may not think that God is a judge
or tyrant, but our Father. But that he adds:

**That is why the Lord has anointed me,**

3\. thus he indicates that he was appointed by God both as king and
priest. For these used to be anointed. And this is now a part of the
description, that Christ is sent by the Spirit of God, and appointed by
God as King and Priest. But so that we would not think that he was a
carnal king, he adds his offices, to which he was sent.

**792** xxm, 228-230. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 61, 1. w. vi,
1270-1272. **793**

**He has sent me to preach to the wretched.**

4 Against those who expect Christ in glory, he says that he is sent,
that is, he is a servant, a messenger, or an apostle who is commanded to
preach the word to the poor, just as Christ himself answered the
disciples of John, \"The poor have the gospel preached to them\" \[Matt.
11:5\]. But the miserable or the poor are not those who are poor in
money, but the sorrowful people who are without all help and counsel,
who are despised in the world. To these, he says, I am sent as a king
and priest, that I may judge them by the word, that they may not
despair, but may gain confidence in mercy and be saved.

5 The pope, claiming to be Christ\'s governor, is in the same error as
the Jews, who expect no other than a glorious Messiah. But the pope
would truly be a governor of Christ if he preached the gospel and
comforted the weak consciences with the words. For these were Christ\'s
offices as long as he lived on earth. But because the pope omits these,
and in the meantime seeks the kingdoms and goods of the world, but
persecutes and blasphemes the gospel and Christ\'s kingdom, he is the
antichrist, not Christ\'s governor. But what the fruit of this word is,
and who the wretched are, he says in the following.

**Connecting the broken hearts.**

6 Paul\'s saying serves to explain this passage: \"The law is the power
of sin, but sin is the sting of death\" \[1 Cor. 15:56\], because these
three tyrants plague and frighten the human heart most severely. The law
is the judge\'s sentence. Sin is the executioner, and the cross is death
itself. Now, if someone were to consider this exceedingly sweet
description of Christ, he would easily be able to resist despair and all
evils when the heart is tortured by the violence of sin. Furthermore,
the prophet begins with the person of Christ at the last, namely death.
I

I am not a judge, he says, I am not a lawgiver; rather, I teach the
opposite; I bind up the brokenhearted, I give life to those who feel
death, who labor in the battle of death. On the other hand:

**To preach to the prisoners an execution.**

7 I deliver from captivity. Those who are oppressed by sin, whose
consciences cannot work themselves out, these I will set free and
redeem, so that in this way sins will not be sins. Thirdly:

**An opening for the bound.**

8 That is, to those who are bound under the law, I preach the word of
grace, and so deliver them. This is my kingdom, this is my ministry,
this is what I am anointed to do, to assist and help such people, not to
condemn them. In what way? \[1) It is very difficult to believe that
Christ can do these things by the mere word, as they are written in the
Gospel: \"Your Son did not die\" \[John 4:50\]. \"Your sins are forgiven
you\" \[Matth. 9, 2\]. Likewise, \"Ye are not under the law, but under
grace\" 2c. \[Thus we see that Christ, if we are to describe Him, is
nothing else than an evangelist of the poor who groan and fret over sin
and death, that He may reign over sin and over death, not only for His
own person, but also in us.

9.^a^ ) If someone could believe these things and treat them according
to their meaning (affectu), as they deserve, he would regard this
salvation as a heaven, which, we may go where we want, hovers over our
head everywhere and is above us. But because in this life we have only
the firstfruits of the spirit, it happens that we cannot fully see
through such great riches and are, as it were, blind to them.

1\) Added by us because we seem to be lacking something here.

a\) Instead of U 9-11, the 1532 edition has the following: But by these
sayings the heart should be accustomed to flee to Christ in all
troubles, and not to fear and shun him as a judge, as the godless papacy
has taught.

794 u. xxiu, r.u\>-W2. Interpretation of the Prophets. W. vi,
1272-127.\" 795

This light of grace, which is offered to us in the word, because we
cannot come to this light. But we see the darkness that is in us, namely
sin, and likewise death. For the prophet also calls those \"broken\"
with whom Christ is actually to deal in his ministry. But we are to feel
the healing more than these evils, and rather look at this freedom than
at the captivity which our sins threaten us with.

\(10\) For this is freedom, that the law, as far as the mind and
conscience are concerned, is removed, and can no longer accuse or injure
us before the judgment of God. Likewise, that we also be free from
death; not that we should not be astonished when the terror of death
confronts us, but that death cannot swallow us up because we are in
Christ. Therefore, when we feel this, we should also rise up against it,
knowing that we have a remedy for these evils, namely Christ, who is an
evangelist for the poor, and is sent to preach deliverance to the
captives 2c.

\(11\) In this way we should practice learning these things, so that we
can say: Christ\'s office is not to overcome death, sin, and the law,
but to help us against them, that they also may be overcome in us, not
by any power that we have, but by the power of Christ triumphing in us
through his word \[4 Cor. 15:57\].

**V. 2. To preach a gracious year of the Lord, and a day of vengeance of
our God.**

He calls the time of grace or the New Testament \"a gracious year. But
he calls it \"a year,\" not a day, indicating that grace will last
forever. But he connects with it \"the day of vengeance\". For the godly
cannot be redeemed where God does not punish the ungodly. Thus vengeance
is also part of our redemption. Also sin and death cannot be destroyed
if this body of sin is not destroyed first.

13\. further, one must follow Paul\'s rule here, that the word of God is
rightly

must be divided \[2 Tim. 2, 15\]. The year of grace belongs to the
grieved and frightened consciences, but the day of vengeance belongs to
the hardened and stiff-necked despisers of the Word. But it generally
happens that the frightened hearts take hold of such threats and are
frightened even more. On the other hand, the wicked and secure, who
should be frightened by the threats, comfort themselves with the
promises and become even more secure. Thus, the human heart is all too
violent on both sides and almost incurable.

**To comfort all the sad.**

14\. Those who are redeemed from the law, from sin, from death, have joy
before God, but fear in the world.

**V. 3 To provide for the mourners in Zion, that jewelry may be given
for ashes, and oil of gladness for sorrow, and beautiful garments for a
grieved spirit.**

Here is a prophetic fullness of speech, which means as much as: I will
comfort the sorrowful.

**That they may be called trees of righteousness, plants of the Lord for
praise.**

16 Instead of: Et vocabuntur in ea fortes justitiae, plantatio ad
glorificandum\] translate: Et vocabuntur arbores justitiae et plantatio
Domini in gloriam. This is a very beautiful image, which contains an
excellent consolation, that Christians, who are despised and worthless
and weak in the eyes of the world, are like a paradise in the eyes of
God and like the most beautiful trees, which are planted from day to day
and grow better and better and bear fruit. The world also has its
gardens, but in them are trees of iniquity. Therefore, they cannot be
compared to Christians.

17 Moreover, this similitude also indicates that a Christian is not made
(fit), but born; not prepared by human powers, but planted by divine
hand. For Christ is the gardener, and Christians are works of pure
grace, who are rooted out of the garden of the world by the Word and
transferred from the world into another life.

796 xxm, M\--NS. Brief Interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 61, 3-9. W. vi,
1275-1270. 797

18\) But that he adds \"plants of the Lord for praise\" means the
sacrifice of the Christians, that they will not slaughter cattle, but\"
praise their Creator. For they are trees which have these words written
on each leaf: I thank thee, O Lord; I praise thee, O Lord 2c.

**V. 4. They will build the ancient deserts.**

19\. They will propagate the church and teach others, both from the Jews
and the Gentiles. But he calls the synagogue \"desolate cities,\"
because the Pharisees and Sadducees have miserably desolated it by their
ungodly teaching.

**V. 5. Strangers will stand.**

20 The pagans will also be admitted to the church and the magisterium.

**V. 6. But you shall be called priests of the Lord.**

All teachers will be priests who will slay the Gentiles, that is,
convert them to Christ through the Word. This is a great praise of the
preaching ministry.

**And shall eat the goods of the Gentiles.**

22 \"The goods of the Gentiles\" is here, as above \[Cap. 60, 6. ff.\]:
All that the Gentiles have, their riches, their power, their eloquence
2c. they will use, not, as before, against the church, but for the
church.

**V. 7. For your reproach shall come double.**

23\. to: Pro confusione vestra duplicia erganze recipietis \[you will
receive). For the Lord first gives them joy in the spirit. Secondly,
they are also honored by the Gentiles in a bodily way. Thus Paul gave
honor to Peter, and Paul to Timothy. So the one joy is in the Lord, the
other in the brethren.

**And for shame they shall be merry on their acres.**

24 \[Instead of: Et rubore laudabunt partem suam 1) m the Vulgate)
translate: Et pro igno-

1\) Namely, this is how it is to be read according to the Vulgate. In
all editions wrong and meaningless: Lt rob\"-\" iLuäadrmt pa

minia laudabunt in agris suis. For one brother honors another for the
sake of Christ who dwells in him.

**V. 8 For I am the Lord who loves justice.**

\(25\) This is a good consolation for the church against the
astonishments of works and hypocrisy. He says that the world considers
you unrighteous and praises its works and its righteousness. But this
very righteousness is abhorrent to me. For it is a theft from God, by
which my honor and glory are snatched away. Thus he describes human
righteousness as being a theft from God (sacrilegium), and he calls the
saints of works people who are guilty of insulting the divine majesty.
For to make righteous is a work that stands with God alone, just as
creation is God\'s alone. For since we are born sinners, those who are
made righteous must be born again, as Christ says, John 3:7: \"Ye must
be born again.\" And a righteous man is everywhere called by Paul a new
creature \[2 Cor. 5, 17.\], and a new man \[Eph. 4, 24.). But now those
who want to be righteous by works attribute to their self-chosen works
that which is God\'s alone, namely, that good works can make and give
birth to a new creature. But this is to rob God of His glory and to
attribute it to human works. He complains about this in this passage,
and calls it \"a predatory burnt offering,\" because they ascribe divine
power to the burnt offering, and rob God of His honor.

**And I will create that their work shall be certain.**

26 These are consolations against the apparent life of the adversaries,
as if to say: Although the world does not think that you are pleasing
and pleasing to God, yet you shall know that your work shall be sure,
that is, that this reward shall be given you by me, which you now hear
in the promise. For the word \"work\" means a reward, or a wage.

**V. 9. Blessed by the Lord.**

It follows that they should also be increased. Thus he promises the
church its duration.

798 L. LXHI. 2W-237. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. I27S-12S3.
799

**V. 10. I rejoice in the Lord.**

28 Here he adds a song in the person of the church. For because the
church has such rich promises, and sees the gospel being spread, she
rejoices in the Lord over the truth, and over the increase of her
offspring.

**For he has clothed me with garments of salvation.**

29 That is, with the faith with which the church, joined to salvation,
triumphs over sin, over death, over the world, over the devil 2c.

30 Furthermore, he who is clothed with faith and has the Holy Spirit is
a true priest. That is why he mentions the priest here. For this is how
this passage must be translated: Quasi sponsum decoratum sacerdotali
ornatu \[as a bridegroom adorned with priestly jewelry\", instead of:
Quasi sponsum decoratum corona in the Vulgate\].

For he alludes to the jewelry of Aaron the high priest, which was
splendid, yet honorable, as is the jewelry of a bridegroom.

\(31\) By the way, he also implies that Christ is a bridegroom and
priest of the church. Therefore we also, who are planted in Christ by
faith, are priests in respect of faith, and bridegrooms in respect of
the jewels and gifts of the Holy Spirit. Furthermore, this is a joy in
the spirit, and is not seen with eyes, but believed in the heart.

**V. 11. So righteousness and praise will arise from the Lord LORD
before all the nations.**

That is, he will multiply the church so that there will be Christians
everywhere and among all. Thus from Christ come all things, praise,
thanksgiving, the word itself, and the multiplication of believers, and
other fruits of the word.

**The sixty-second chapter.**

1 The word is both hated and despised by the world, for the adversaries
pursue it with violence and cunning. The others, who do not persecute
it, either despise it, or hold it in low esteem, and rather follow their
doings and gain. This contempt grieves and distresses the ministers of
the word so much that they are sometimes impatiently challenged, and
would rather be silent than see so great a contempt for the word. Thus
Jeremiah saith \[Cap. 20, 7.\], \"I am become a mocker over the word
daily.\" And Elijah would rather be killed by the Lord than teach
longer, 1 Kings 19:4.

2 It seems that this is also what happened to Isaiah here. But he
strengthens himself against this challenge, so that he will not sin by
leaving his profession. Although, he says, the word is laughed at by
all, and suffers persecution from most, I will not desist from preaching
because of it.

For as I have not begun to teach for the sake of the ungodly, so will I
not cease for the sake of the ungodly. \"For the sake of Jerusalem,\"
that is, for the sake of the pious and godly, I will continue to teach,
and again despise the ungodly despisers 2c.

He adds excellent promises about the church, namely that God will take
care of it, help it, and increase it, that he will give it the best
teachers and obedient disciples. Finally, he also exhorts to receive and
accept the word of the Gospel. But it is a new speech.

**V. 1. until their righteousness arises.**

4 \[Instead of: Donec egrediatur ut splendor justus ejus, et salvator
ejus ut lampas accendatur in the Vulgate\] translate: Donec egrediatur
sicut splendor justitia ejus, et salus ejus accendatur^1^ ) sicut
lampas. I know, he says,

1\) In the Erlanger: aoosnäatur; in the Wittenberger: 8U666näatur.

800 **XXIII, W7-2SS.** Short interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 62, 1-5. w.
**vi. 1283-1286.** 801

that Christ will come, who shall bring righteousness and salvation to
the godly; for whose sake I will preach, that at least some may be
preserved in the word 2c. He connects righteousness and salvation,
because after the forgiveness of sins, which is righteousness,
persecution and death still remain, from which Christ finally delivers
his own.

**V. 2. that the Gentiles may see your righteousness (justum tuum).**

5\. righteousness and salvation will appear in such a way that they will
also be revealed to the Gentiles. But he calls justum, in the factual
gender, the church government, which was instituted by Christ and
propagated to the church through the apostles. As if he wanted to say:
The Gentiles will see the church as it was justified by faith in Christ,
and ordered with certain usages of the sacraments, likewise also with
other offices, as to teach, to comfort, to put under ban 2c. For this is
actually in this place the righteousness or the just (justum).

**And you shall be called by a new name.**

6\. before that the name was called: The people of God in Zion, the
people who were brought out of Egypt, the people of Israel, the seed of
Abraham 2c. But these were fleshly names, which went to persons. But in
the New Testament we are Christians, not because we have what the Jews
had, but because we are called God\'s people who believe in Christ and
have the promises of the life to come. For this reason we are called
\"children of God\", as John 1:12 says.

\(7\) But there is an emphasis in the words, \"The mouth of the LORD
shall call the name.\" As if to say, \"It will not be a name according
to the flesh, but this thing is based on word and faith alone. And
Christians have no wisdom, no strength, no salvation, no redemption,
except in and through Christ alone. For though Christians administer
magisterial offices, obey the authorities, and walk every man in his
profession, yet they are not called of it.

Christians, but by faith alone they are called so, because they know
Christ is their righteousness.

**V. 3. A royal hat in the hand of your God.**

8 That is, you will be a glorious kingdom, but in the hand of the Lord,
not in the hand of Caesar, or in the sight of the world; rather, the
church in the sight of the world is dung and filth scattered to and fro
by the hand of the devil.

**V. 4. You shall no longer be called the forsaken.**

These are excellent promises of the church. The flesh, however, is
offended by the fact that all this does not consist in deeds, but in
mere words. \"You shall be called,\" he says, but we are not satisfied
with that. We would rather be so than be called by this name, which he
here sets, \"I delight in her.\" Therefore, these are spiritual
promises, which are accepted by faith alone.

**V. 5 For as a dear paramour loveth a paramour.**

\(10\) He wants to persuade the Church, through the strongest
expressions of affection (affectibus), to be loved by God, not with a
common love, but as a youth loves a virgin fiercely, and as a bridegroom
embraces his bride. For these are the greatest movements of the heart,
as David testifies when he says of Saul\'s son Jonathan: \"Your love has
been more special to me than the love of a woman\" \[2 Sam. 1:26\]. And
Solomon says: \"I do not know the way of a young man for a maid\"
\[Proverbs 30:19\]. Christ not only loves the church, but also shares
his goods with her, like a bridegroom, and gives himself completely to
the church with all his righteousness.

\(11\) Therefore, if you have sin, it is no longer yours, but Christ\'s,
and His righteousness is yours again. Thus we confuse our death with
life, our weakness with the power of Christ, our hell with the
righteousness of Christ.

802 L. xxm, 23S-242. interpretations on the prophets. W. Vi. 1286-1289.
803

the sky. But this happens in secret, namely in faith. For if you look at
the outward appearance and the judgment of the world, the church is a
whore of the devil, and Christians are bastards. Therefore, these
glorious promises must be drawn on the Word and on faith, and this love
we must not feel, but believe. And if it is believed, it will awaken an
infinite joy even in the midst of tribulation.

\(12\) Thus the article of justification and grace is the most
delightful, and alone makes a theologian, and a theologian a judge over
the earth, and over all disputes. But there are few of them who have
either considered this article carefully or teach it correctly.

**V. 6. O Jerusalem, I will appoint watchmen on your walls.**

13 \"Watchmen\" are actually 1) the bishops and shepherds of souls who
watch over the flock in the word of salvation. But he adds that the
office of a good shepherd is never to be silent about the Lord, to
preach about Christ and his benefits at all times, as Christ commanded
at the Lord\'s Supper \[Luc. 22:19\].

14 Furthermore, it must be noted that he counts good teachers as the
highest good, therefore we should also hold them in high esteem; and the
world is undoubtedly now drawing a heavy judgment upon its neck by the
present contempt of the ministers of the Word.

**Who shall remember the Lord, that there be no silence among you.**

He repeats this three times to indicate the actions of the world, which
can suffer nothing less than the word of God. Therefore, he reminds us
that we should not remain silent, no matter how much the world rages and
rages against it, and at the same time promises the word victory against
the world and against the gates of hell, so that the word and the church
will remain, but the godless adversaries will perish 2c.

1\) Erlanger: proprii instead of: propris.

**V. 8. 9. The Lord has sworn by His right hand.**

16 He adds an oath to strengthen the weak consciences, that it will
happen that they will feel the fruit of the word which they teach, that
they will feel the fruit of the faith which they have. But it is not
possible for an ungodly person to feel the true gifts and the true
fruits of the word and faith, but only the godly are uplifted and
confirmed by the word, whose hearts are cleansed by faith and whose
consciences are enlightened; and through their teaching others are also
edified. This happens because they praise the Lord in the courts, where
they come together to preach \[Ps. 122:3, 4\].

\(17\) So also today we learn that this oath is being fulfilled. The
false brethren boast of the word, they boast of the spirit and the
faith. But they deceive themselves, because they do not have the thing
of the word and faith, but only the foam of it. This we see when it
comes to the article of justification, which they do not understand at
all, although they have learned to parrot the words. This is what he
says here: \"I will not give your grain to your enemies to eat\" 2c.

**V. 10. Go, go through the gates.**

18 Now he adds an exhortation to the promise. For a good teacher should
be able to teach and to exhort by sound doctrine, Titus 1:9. But
doctrine is, as it were, the dialectic of theology, by which men are
taught of the merit and death of Christ, that Christ was sufficient for
our sins on the cross. The exhortation is, as it were, the rhetoric of
theology, when we say: Do not be frightened by the sight of enemies who
say that your work is in vain and make you fainthearted. Continue
bravely to believe and teach; Christ lives 2c.

The gates of righteousness are the New Testament and the gospel of
grace. As if to say: the gates are open, the Church teaches the word of
the forgiveness of the

**804** L. xxm, 242-244. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 63, 1-3.
W. VI, 1289-1293. **805**

Sins, everything is ready \[Matth. 22, 4.\], and God has promised that
His word shall not be ineffective. Therefore \"go through the gates\",
accept the word 2c.

\(20\) \"Remove the stones,\" that is, take away the aversions, take
care that ye keep the word pure and clean. As Christ, Paul and Peter
also say: \"Beware of false prophets\" \[Matth. 7, 15\].

21\) \"Raise a banner over the nations,\" that is, drive the word;
always use the word as if you were standing in the meeting to resist the
false teachers.

**V. 11. 12. Behold, the Lord lets himself be heard.**

That is, the gospel is spread throughout the whole earth.

**Behold, your salvation is coming.**

This is the summa. If thou be opposed by force or by guile, let not thy
courage fail, but continue to teach. Behold, behold, thy labor is not
without profit, thou shalt retain the victory, thine enemies shall be
defeated, for \"thy salvation cometh.\" We have explained this Hebrew
phrase above. This is the conclusion of the one sermon that deals with
the promises of the future church.

**The sixty-third chapter.**

\(1\) The prophet, according to his custom, adds a threat to the promise
and exhortation, so that the hardened, who do not respect the promises
and laugh at the exhortations, may at least be moved by threats to see
if they can still be converted. He introduces persons by speech (facit
prosopopoeiam) in order to give the matter a more terrible appearance.
Therefore, it is threats with which he announces to the synagogue its
final devastation.

**V. 1. Who is he who comes from Edom?**

2\. edom means a needy man. This is what he calls the synagogue because
it has stained itself with the blood of the prophets and Christ.
\"Bazra\" means one fortified. Thus the Jews were fortified with divine
privileges, they had the promises, the fathers 2c., Rom. 9, 4. 5. But he
begins with a doubt to give the matter a the more terrible appearance.
As if he wanted to say: Dear God, what do I see in my people? There
comes a man in a bloody garment 2c. Thus he indicates the great defeat
that the synagogue has suffered.

**Who is so adorned in his garments.**

\(3\) He whom ye crucified, and whom ye reckoned dead, hath now received
the kingdom, that he may punish you.

**It is I who teach righteousness, and I am a master to help.**

4\. he starts a conversation. For he lets Christ answer: I rise up in
anger and indignation, but not against you and other godly men. For I am
a righteousness maker to the godly, and a salvation maker, redeeming
them from death and all evils. Therefore do not be afraid.

V. 2. **Why is your robe so red?**

If you are the Savior, what does the bloody garment mean? Why is your
dress like a winepress treaders?

V. 3. **I tread the winepress alone.**

6 I have punished the unbelieving synagogue. But that he adds \"alone\"
means that the Jews were destroyed for no other reason than because they
rejected and crucified Christ. This sin, that they did not believe in
Christ and crucified him, crushes, corrupts and scatters them. For all
other sins can still be tolerated; but the contempt of Christ and of the
Word cannot be tolerated nor forgiven. Further, so the word
\"winepress\" signifies the calamity and defeat of the corrupt people.

[806 k. XXIII, 244-246. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1293-1296. 807]{.underline}

**V. 4. For I have set before me a day of vengeance.**

They did not want to believe when I foretold it to them, so now they
find out in fact that I did not speak it in vain. They did not want the
life I offered them, therefore they are showered with death and all
misfortunes. But notice that Christ visits those who despise him with
such punishments. Thus, because of the contempt of the Word, ours are
afflicted with riots, with hunger, with war, and will be afflicted even
more.

V. 5 **For I looked around.**

8 He speaks of his suffering. When I was in the flesh, no one cared for
me, no one received me, they laughed at me.

my afflictions, though I came into the flesh to make them blessed; but
they thought that I was oppressed, but I am not oppressed.\" For my
righteousness has helped me, therefore I now reign, and bring the
despisers to punishment.

V. 6. **I have pushed their fortune to the ground.**

9\. \"Their wealth\", that is everything they had, the promises, the
testament, the law 2c. All this is of no further use to them, but they
have lost it. Here we will put the end of the sixty-third chapter. 1)

1\) Here our Bible closes the 63rd chapter, while in Hebrew and Vulgate
this chapter has nineteen verses.

**The sixty-fourth chapter.**

Because the prophet is saddened by the previous sermon about the future
fall of the people, he turns his mind away from the examples of wrath
and focuses it on the past benefits of God, and makes an excellent song
about the old miracles and benefits of God, with which he aligns himself
and prays for the captives in Babylon. Thus he does both: he consoles
himself with the remembrance of the past benefits, and at the same time
praises God\'s inexhaustible goodness.

\(2\) But this is an art, if one can support oneself in the temptations
with the examples of God\'s grace and mercy. For this is how it tends to
happen in very difficult temptations: we do not think of Christ who
suffered, or of Peter who was forgiven, but of the downfall of Sodom,
the flood of sin, Pharaoh who was hardened, Judas who was rejected, and
similar terrifying examples of wrath. But the opposite was to happen.
These examples of wrath were to frighten the hardened; but the
frightened were to be comforted and uplifted by the examples of grace,
as here the prophesy of the Lord is.

The same is done by the prophet, who, frightened by the sad judgment of
the Jewish people, showers himself with the multitude of divine
blessings, so that he sees nothing but mercy and blessings. If we fix
our eyes only on the examples of wrath, since we are already terrified
beforehand, hatred, blasphemy and grumbling against God will be
awakened. But from this remembrance of the divine benefits, peace
against God and thanksgiving arise.

Cap. 63, 7. **I will remember the goodness of the Lord.**

This is the subject of which he wants to speak. I want to talk about the
benefits of God. Why? Because I am taken by the sad thoughts about the
downfall of my people.

\(4\) It is the same for us when we remember the abominations of the
Pope, the godlessness of the Turks, the ingratitude of the world. For
from the remembrance of these evils arises, as I have said, hatred
against God, and blasphemy as to why God has done this and that.

808 **D. XXIH. 246-248.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 63, 7-11.
**w. VI, 1296-1299.** 809

do and allow. David, however, gives a completely different rule; after
he has narrated the manifold benefits of God in the 107th Psalm, he says
\[v. 43\]: \"Who is wise, and keeps this? Then shall they know how many
benefits the Lord showeth.\" For when we consider the benefits and
mercies of the Lord, that he gives sunshine, rain, annual growth of
fruit, abundance, life, blessedness 2c., then the whole world becomes
full of the grace and mercy of God, as the 33rd Psalm, v. 5, says: \"The
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.\" Thus it happens that one
sees the mercy of the LORD. This is followed by love for God and His
praise. To know this is to be wise, says the Psalm.

5 The prophet remembers here in the beginning of the divine benefits in
general, in which one must include all histories of this people, which
are described in the second book of Moses, in the book of Joshua, in the
book of Judges 2c., where we read that they were saved from great
dangers.

Cap. 63, 8. **For he said, They are indeed my people, children who are
not false.**

6 Here he describes the beneficence in general: \"I am their Savior\",
because \"they are my people\", they are \"children who are not false\",
that is, there are still some who truly believe in me, who are not
hypocrites.

Cap. 63, 9. **He who worried them also worried him.**

7 \[In tribulatione eorum non est tribulatus\] that is, I chastised them
with a fatherly heart, not with an excited or angry heart, with the rod
of judgment, not of wrath. It can 1) also be translated thus: In omni
tribulatione eorum ipse est tribulatus \[\"He who afflicted them also
afflicted him\"\]. As he says to Paul, \"Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me?\" \[Acts 9:4\] And, \"He that despiseth you despiseth me\"
\[Luc. 10:16.\]

**And the angel, being before him, 2) helped them.**

\(8\) This is how they were preserved in Egypt and on the Red Sea by the
angel.

1\) According to the Keri: i\^\>; in the Kethib: rr\^.

2\) Erlanger: taeist instead of: iaeiei.

Cap. 63, 10. **But they embittered and outraged His Holy Spirit.**

9\) Not that there is such a movement of the heart with God, but because
there is such a movement with godly people, 3) who are angered and
provoked to anger because of the wickedness and ingratitude of the
world. This is how Moses and Aaron were grieved. Thus it is written in
the first book of Moses Cap. 6, 6: \"It grieved him\" 2c.

Cap. 63, 11. **And he remembered the previous time again.**

\(10\) After they recognized their sin, he reconciled himself to them
again. He mentions primarily Moses, and not David, because he gave the
law through Moses, and through Moses he promised good as well as
threatened evil. Here, too, it must be noted that GOD is not moved by
our merits, but by His mercy. For he speaks, GOD fei been moved, not by
the present people, but by the past people, to whom he had made the
promise. But the promises make it so that our prayers are heard and
reconcile GOD, as David prays everywhere, \"For your name\'s sake, O
LORD, be merciful,\" 2c. \[Ps. 25, 11.\] Thus all works and merits are
excluded, and GOD hears the prayers for His name\'s sake, for His
word\'s sake, for His promise\'s sake, and for His own sake, not for our
worthiness.

\(11\) This passage is useful for us to hope that God will help us, even
though we are sinners, and to learn to pray, as it were, against our
conscience, saying, \"Although I am a sinner, you do not trust sinners,
but hear them, as you promised. But this is an exceedingly difficult
work, and without faith quite impossible.

**Where then is he that leadeth them out of the sea.**

12\. after recounting the previous benefits, he turns to prayer and asks
in the person of the people who went to Babylon

3\) Erlanger: üt instead of: kit in the Wittenberger.

810 L. XXIII, 248-250. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1299-1303. 811

You gave Moses, who led our ancestors through the Red Sea; oh, if you
would also send your people, when they will be captives, a Moses, who
will lead them out of captivity, as out of another Red Sea. Even among
them there were many wicked, and yet you allowed the redemption to take
place for the sake of the godly; do this also now. So I take this prayer
to be especially for the captive people, not for the synagogue, which is
so fallen that it cannot be restored to its former state.

Cap. 63, 14: **As the cattle go down into the field.**

13 Thus he indicates the greatest certainty with which they were led out
of the Red Sea. All this, however, as I have explained above

1 ff\], he says, in order to arouse confidence and also to strengthen
it, so that he could arrange the prayer all the better.

Cap. 63, 15. **Look now from heaven.**

14\. He provokes God to zeal for his name and honor for himself, so that
he may show that he does not want to be of the same mind as the tyrants
of Babylon. As if to say: If we perish, your name and your honor will
suffer danger. For you promised that you would be God to this people;
therefore it is not this people that will be attacked, but your name and
your honor, since they are so miserably held captive by the godless
heathen.

Cap. 63, 16. **For Abraham does** not **know about us.**

This is a good passage against the invocation of the saints. For the
gloss is useless: Abraham knew nothing of us, namely, when he lived.
Rather, Abraham believed, and through faith he knew that he would have
descendants. Here the school theologians dispute whether the saints see
our misery. But the Scripture says that they sleep. Therefore we should
know and believe that they have died to us. But how they live is not our
business, for this is not revealed to us by the Word.

And it is enough that we know that they have died to us. Therefore, they
shall not be called upon by us. Our only recourse is not to the saints,
especially to those who have died, but to God, who is a Father from
eternity. No matter how much they may have been fathers, they have now
ceased to be fathers.

Cap. 63, 17. **Why do you let us, O Lord, stray from your ways?**

\(16\) These are the words of a fervent heart: \"O Lord, why then hast
thou caused us to err? We do not understand this movement, so we will
take it privately that the opinion is this: Because we did not want to
hear your word, you let us err and sin, as it is wont to happen: Sin is
punished with sin. The negligence in the word and in prayer, which we do
not pay attention to at the beginning, is gradually followed by a
noticeable transgression, until finally a habit of sinning is formed, so
that we err without end.

**Return again for the sake of your servants.**

17 Here he distinguishes the godly from the godless. At least spare for
the sake of the godly, of whom there are still many. For God sends
misfortune for the sake of the wicked. But because in this life the
godly live among the godless, it happens that the godly must also bear a
very large part of this misfortune, and the godless, on the other hand,
enjoy that good which God gives in the world for the sake of the godly.
In the future life, however, the godly will be separated from the
godless, who alone will endure the well-deserved punishment.

Cap. 63, 19. **And we were not called by your name.**

They rage against us as if we had no God. For he accuses the devil and
the Babylonians of raging indiscriminately against the godly and the
godless, against God Himself, and against the worship of God. Through
this unseemly procedure, however, the heart is lifted up, and faith is
strengthened, so that prayer becomes stronger and more fervent.

**812** xxin, 2SN-2S2. Short interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 64, 1-5. W.
vi. E-isos. **813**

Cap. 64, 1**. Oh that you would rend the heavens.**

019 They despise thee as a weak God, because thou art hid in the temple
like a mouse in a hole. Come, show that you have a far more splendid
seat and place: Rend the heavens, and come down. \"The mountains\" are
the princes and the mighty in the world, who are harder than iron and
demonds when they sense a happy progress. On the other hand, when God
comes to visit them, they are softer than water. We see the same thing
in heretics and works saints for their person, when they are attacked by
temptations of which they are not aware. This is exactly what the
prophet wanted to show with the simile of hot water.

**V. 2: That your name may be known among your enemies.**

20 As if he wanted to say: They cannot be corrected in any other way
than by plagues, as Pharaoh finally says in the middle of the Red Sea:
\"Let us flee from Israel, the Lord is fighting against us\" \[Ex
14:25\]. He did not realize or see this before the disaster.

**V. 3. by the miracles you do 2c.**

21 \[Instead of: Cum feceris mirabilia, non sustinebimus in the
Vulgate\] translate: Faciendo miracula, quae non expectabamus. But it is
a glorious consolation for the afflicted. For in all divine works there
is first of all the greatest weakness and the utmost despair, so that
reason may be utterly convinced that there is neither counsel nor help
left. Therefore, when God finally redeems, He redeems in such a way that
it exceeds human desire and understanding. This is what he did with the
children of Israel in Egypt, and likewise at the Red Sea. For they had
never entertained the hope that they would go forth with the treasures
of all the land of Egypt, nor that they would see their enemies perish
before their face.

\(22\) Therefore, the prophet indicates the nature of faith when he
says: \"It is not understood. For faith expects that which it neither
sees nor feels, and which is quite incomprehensible, not only in its
essence but also in its greatness,

and after all pieces, and about that which we can ask and desire.

V. 4: **As it is not heard from the world, nor is it heard with the
ears.**

This is a general description of faith, which must not only be applied
to the life to come, but to all cases and examples of faith, just as the
author of the epistle to the Hebrews makes this description, that faith
is an expectation of things hoped for \[Heb 11:1\]. But such things must
be hoped for, of which Isaiah says here that no eye sees them, and they
are not heard with ears, but must be expected with simple faith. For
there are always new cases in which one must prove his faith, and of
which one has no particular example. (For we do not exclude the general
examples of faith.) But just as we are always confronted with new
tribulations, so we are always confronted with unexpected and unexpected
salvation.

\(24\) Paul, according to his custom, applied this general saying to a
particular thing \[1 Cor. 2:9\]. For that which is spoken in general can
be applied to particular things without detriment to the general saying.

V. 5. **You meet the joyful.**

\(25\) To make the misery even greater, he holds the time of Babylonian
misery against a more blissful one, when God was gracious to His own,
helped them and heard them. In former times, he says, you met your own
with help and answer, there were happier times; there the people were
blissful and cheerful, since everything went well for them, since
righteousness and godliness were flourishing among the people 2c.

**Behold, you are well wroth.**

26\. this also belongs to the praise of the past times, that God was not
only merciful to them, but also forgave them when they had sinned. For I
would rather take it this way than from the time of the captivity, that
even if they sinned, God would redeem them one day 2c.

[814 k. xxm, 253-255. interpretations on the prophets. W. Vl, IS06-I30S.
815]{.underline}

**V. 6. But now we are all like the unclean.**

27 Here he begins the other part of the comparison, namely the time of
the Babylonian captivity. So blissful were the former times; but now it
is as if all, as many as they are. Were evil. There is an emphasis in
the word \"all\". For he calls them \"unclean\" because they are kept
like the unclean and ungodly.

**And all our righteousness is like a foul meid.**

We have sometimes used this passage against human righteousness. This
view is good, but it is not the real meaning of this passage. For since
the prophet sees that many righteous people were led into captivity when
Nehemiah, Ezra and others were, it grieves him that for the wicked\'s
ungodliness the righteous people were kept longer in captivity. As if he
wanted to say: For the sake of five righteous people you would have
given Sodom to Abraham; here are more godly people, and yet you deal
with them in the same way as if they themselves were also godless and
unclean. They have to bear the punishment of ungodliness, although they
are righteous, just as if they themselves had also 1) sinned. This heart
movement of the captive people is expressed here by the prophet.

29\. But there are other sayings in Scripture that condemn human
righteousness. Like the saying, \"Lord, do not enter into judgment with
your servant, for there is no living man righteous before you\" \[Ps.
143:2\]. \"When ye have done all, say, We are unprofitable servants\"
\[Luc. 17, 10.\]. And in the prayer of the Lord: \"Forgive us our
debts\" \[Matth. 6, 12.\]. And in the Psalm: \"For this all the saints
will ask you\" 2c. \[Ps. 32, 6.\] Therefore our righteousness is truly
defiled. Therefore we have another righteousness apart from us, in
Christ, by which we are justified and holy, Phil. 3, 9.

1\) The preceding words, from the first \"as if they themselves also,\"
are missing in the Wittenberg.

**V. 7. No one calls on your name.**

\(30\) Although there were many godly people in captivity who called
upon the name of God, he says that this calamity of captivity with which
we are oppressed is proof that there is no one who truly calls upon God
or keeps Him, for otherwise we would be delivered.

**For you hide your face from us.**

31 He says: We see nothing but sin, threats, fear and terror. For the
face of God is twofold: the inward, when he kindly drips into our hearts
the word of comfort and forgiveness of sins. The outward, when he also
gives outward lovely things, as peace, happy progress, abundance of all
things, and takes away the wrath, swarms, famine, pestilence, wars,
etc., which are the devil\'s face. Thus he promises to Moses 2 Mos. 33,
2) 14. \[Vulg.\]: \"My face shall pass before thee, and I will give thee
rest.\" The 4th Psalm, v. 7, calls this face \"the light of his
countenance\", and here and there it is called \"light\" in the holy
scriptures. But God hides His face when He takes away His word and good
deeds, and the law, sin, wars, famine and other misfortunes remain.

**V. 8. Now, Lord, you are our Father.**

So far, the prophet has summarized all the motives with which he could
both raise himself up and move God to help. Now he adds an emphatic
resolution: What does it need much words? \"You are our Father\", our
faith clings to you, although the outward appearance of things and the
senses tell us that you are angry with our sins 2c.

**We are Thon, you are our potter.**

33\. he brings up the promise. You promised to be our potter \[Is. 45,
9\]. We have been a sinful clay, therefore you have kneaded us into a
dough. Well then, form us anew, and heal us.

2\) In the issues: Lxo6. 32.

[**816** k. xxm, 2SÜ-2S7. Brief Interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 64, 8-10.
W. Vl, 1S0S-13IS. **817**]{.underline}

redeem us. Otherwise, we will be considered not to be your clay, but
dung in the alley.

**V. 9. See that we are all of the people.**

These are the last tears. You have no other people but us. Therefore,
your name and honor will be in danger where you do not help us.

Thus this chapter contains a battle of faith, which feels nothing but
wrath all around, and yet it breaks through and believes that wrath will
not last forever. But such examples are necessary in the temptations.
For this is the greatest art, if one can be wise here, that when there
is anger and tribulation, one thinks that God is only acting as if he
were angry. For the flesh judges according to the senses and the outward
appearance.

The people of the world have a false appearance and cannot be uplifted
by remembrance and the hope of future help.

**V. 10. The cities of your sanctuary have become desolate.**

He remembers the city and the temple, not because of the wood and the
stones, but because it was founded on God\'s word, and because God had
bound Himself to this place through the word. Therefore, he also calls
it the holy city, not because of the people, but because of the first
and second commandments, because God\'s Word and Name were in it. Thus
every Christian is holy, although he is defiled according to himself and
his nature. Thus he also calls the temple \"a house of holiness\"
because holy things were performed there, because there one sacrificed,
taught, sang and prayed, and performed the other things that the word of
God required.

**The sixty-fifth chapter.**

This is the last sermon of the prophet, and the last threat of the
future desolation of the synagogue in the time of Christ, and of the
calling of the Gentiles. For these prophecies consist of different
sermons, which were not preached at one time. So also we teach in our
sermons sometimes faith, sometimes love, sometimes the last future of
Christ 2c.

**V. 1. I am sought by those who did not ask for me.**

This passage seems to argue with the saying in Matthew \[Cap. 6, 33\]:
\"Seek first the kingdom of God\", but it does not argue against it. For
the seeking is done in a twofold way: First, according to the precept of
the Word of God, and thus God is found. Secondly, He is sought by our
actions and suggestions, and thus He is not found. Therefore, he does
not condemn the gross sins here, but that they were committed by God.

seek the word\] of God and religion. Religion is the best of all human
works, and yet it is condemned if it is not based on the Word of God.
For God does not want to be sought through our actions, indeed, He
cannot be found at all through our actions. Therefore, we should put
aside our speculations about His majesty and leave our works behind, and
instead take hold of the word, or rather let ourselves be taken hold of
by the word. And apart from the word we shall neither speak nor think
nor hear anything of God. For God wants to lay the first stone, and then
He will be happily sought and found when He knocks on our hearts through
the Word. As Paul says, \"I pursue after him, whether I will take hold
of it, after I have been taken hold of JEsu Christ\" \[Phil. 3, 12.\].

3\) Therefore, the entire papacy is condemned here, and all religions in
the world, except the one that is called the \"religion of the world.

818 k. xxin, W7-2SS. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, isig-isie.
819

is based on faith in Christ. For the pope and monks also seek God; but
dear one, where is it written that God wants to give eternal life for
such works? For the text says: \"He who believes in Him shall not be put
to shame\" \[Rom. 9, 33. Ps. 25, 3.\], not he who puts on a monk\'s
habit, who says mass 2c.

**I am found by those who did not seek me.**

4 That is, I was found by the pagans who did not bother to seek God
because they were without the Word. Thus he not only condemns the works
and deeds of the religious, but he also freely offers himself to those
who live very wickedly. He must do this partly because of the wickedness
of men and partly because of his goodness. The wickedness is that the
Jews despised the Word and the prophets, and provoked God by that which
was not God. That is why he tempted them again on the one who is not a
people \[Deut. 32, 21\]. On the other hand, the divine goodness also
requires God to make Himself known to the erring; but He does this
through the Word. Thus, the Jews had to be rejected because of their
excessive religion, and the Gentiles had to be accepted because of their
excessive emptiness (inanitatem).

\(5\) Just as the seeking is done in two ways, so also the service is
twofold. One kind of service is done by us without the word of God; and
this service is not a service of God, but of the devil, which is done by
lying and glibness \[1 Tim. 4:2\]. The other kind of worship is done
according to the precept of the Word, which consists in believing the
Word that offers us Christ who died for us, and this is followed by
outward good works.

V. 2. **For I stretch out my hand.**

6 This is the cause of the so terrifying anger and threat. The fault is
not in GOD, but in those who seek Him. \"I stretch out my hand,\" I
offer myself, I do well, I ask, I threaten, and

indeed \"daily.\" But they mock the hands that are stretched out, kill
the prophets, and \"walk in a way that is not good, according to their
thoughts,\" that is, not according to my word; not only in omission,
that they do not believe the word, but also in action (positive), that
they do the opposite of the word.

V. 3. **A people who outrage me is always before my face, sacrificing in
the gardens.**

\(7\) Here he adds, what are the ways according to their thoughts? For
he does not condemn adultery or theft, which reason also disapproves of,
but the burning of incense and the sacrifices which were brought to the
God who had brought them out of Egypt, namely the greatest and most holy
works. What then is the defect of these sacrifices? Certainly this, that
he adds, \"in the gardens.\" For they had the command that they should
sacrifice in the temple. They had no command to sacrifice in the
gardens. So now we also condemn the whole way of life and all worship
that was done without God\'s command.

**They smoke on the bricks.**

8 In a disparaging way (per tapinosin) he calls their altars \"bricks\".
As if he wanted to say: You praise your altars highly, but what are
they, but bricks, which are carried together on a heap? Here the
hypocrites object: the altar in the temple is nothing but wood and
brass. Therefore, a distinction must be made, namely, that the altars
which are outside the temple are nothing but mere bricks. The altar in
the temple is not only mere ore and mere wood, but (that I say so,
verbatum aes et verbatum lignum) an ore and a wood, which is connected
with God\'s word, that is, which is erected according to the word and by
divine command. So also the temple has the word; the gardens are without
the word.

9 We answer our heretics in the same way today, that holy baptism is not
only water, but water with the word of God.

820 xxiii, 25S-26I. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 65, 3-11. w.
vi, isis-ims. 821

Thus, in the Holy Communion there is not bad bread and bad wine, but
bread and wine with the word of God.

**V. 4. Dwell among the tombs.**

He punishes their perverse diligence. True piety is generally cold, but
wickedness burns no differently than fire in stubble. In the temple, he
says, they cannot endure, but in the rocks they have chosen they dwell,
and there they endure.

**They eat pork.**

11\. among the sacrifices they also bring pork, which they were
forbidden to eat even as a household food, let alone at the sacrifices.

**V. 5. and say: Stay at home, and do not stir me.**

12: Moreover, being exceedingly ungodly, they are also very hopeful;
they reject 1) Isaiah and God stretching out His hand as an unclean one,
whom they themselves want to sanctify, but not to be sanctified by him;
they want to teach him, but not to be taught by him.

**Such shall become a smoke.**

13\. this is the punishment, as it says in the gospel \[Matth. 22, 7.\]:
\"He sent out his army, and set fire to their city.\" They laughed at
these great and terrifying threats. It is an admirable brevity.

**V. 6. 7. Who ravished me on the hills.**

14\. super colles exprobraverunt mihi, that is, they have disgraced me.
But it is a description of one\'s own righteousness that it is an insult
to GOD. For GOD is most dishonored when we worship Him with the greatest
diligence with self-chosen services, which we perform without GOD\'s
word and command. It is a terrible judgment, however, that the
hypocrites do nothing else with their worship and works than that they
desecrate God, and

1\) Erlanger: äamnat instead of: Zananant.

rob him of his honor, and as Rom. 2, 22 \[Vulg.\] says: commit theft of
gold. Thus, the entire papacy is god-robbing.

**V. 8. Thus says the Lord.**

15 Here he answers an interjection. For the objection could be made:
Wilt thou then corrupt the righteous with the ungodly? He answers: No;
but, just as one who destroys a barren vineyard yet leaves one or
another fruitful vine unharmed, so will I preserve the rest, as it is
said elsewhere \[2 Pet. 2:9.\], \"The Lord knoweth how to deliver the
godly out of temptation.\"

V. 9. **But I will cause seed to grow out of Jacob.**

16 This is a promise with which he comforts the weak, that the word and
the gospel should remain forever.

**V. 10. And Saron shall become a house for the host.**

17 \[Instead of: Et erunt campestria in caulas gregum\] translate like
this: Erit Saron in caulam gregis, Further, Saron and Carmel are very
famous mountains in the Jewish land, because of the cattle pastures.
Achor and Nephaim are very famous valleys. Therefore he promises with
figurative words, it will be so around the church, that the word should
be preached daily in it, so that the believers with it graze, and would
be much of them 2c. The great cattle are the godly, the stronger in
faith, who are sent to teach. The herds are the weaker ones.

**V.11. But ye that forsake the LORD, forgetting my holy mountain,
prepare a table for Gad, and pour out drink offerings unto Meni.**

18\. \"Gad\", I believe, is Mars. For gadad in Hebrew means to arm
oneself. From this comes Gad, as if you would say a man of war
(latrunculus). \"Meni,\" I believe, is Mercurius, and that he was the
idol of the merchants. For Meni is called a number. To this he alludes,
as he speaks \[v. 12.\], \"I will number you to the sword.\"

822 xxm, Wi-264. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 1319-1323. 823

**V. 12. Because I called and you did not answer.**

019 This is the fault why he will destroy them, that they should forsake
the word, and choose their own doings.

20\. Therefore, each one shall adopt such a way of life as has the word
of God and which he knows is pleasing to God, that is, the one to which
he is called, even if it is despised and lowly. To be a servant, a
maidservant, a father, a mother, these are such statuses that are
established and sanctified by the Word of God, and which are pleasing to
God. But if one becomes a monk, God does not approve of that, because He
has not commanded it. So it is ungodly works to say mass, to take vows,
to make pilgrimages, because they are without the Word.

V. 13. 14. **Therefore says the Lord GOD.**

21 Now he also adds promises, which he transfers from the Jewish people
to the remnant and to the Gentiles. Furthermore, I make no distinction
here between the spiritual promises. For Christians have the promises of
this life and the life to come \[1 Tim. 4:8\]. The goods of the godly,
though they are small, are nevertheless pure goods, for blessing is
connected with them. The wicked are in want even of the greatest goods
and riches, because the curse is with them. But we should make these
sayings into proverbs, with which we comforted ourselves in shame, in
want, in sorrow, and in affliction, saying, \"The Lord saith, Behold, my
servants shall eat, but ye shall hunger. \"2c. For those who rely on
this promise cannot possibly be deceived.

**V. 15. and shall leave your name for my chosen ones to swear by.**

22\) This is spoken in the Hebrew way, and means that the name \"Jew\"
will be such an abomination that people will use it instead of a severe
curse, and those who want to wish one the greatest misfortune will wish
for him to be like a Jew.

**And the LORD shall kill thee, and call his servants by another name.**

23\. the name of the Jews will no longer be famous; you will lose the
kingdom and the priesthood; and in the future the name of the Christians
will become famous, which will be blessed, and people will use it for a
blessing; as it is said, Give God that you may become a true Christian.

**V. 16: That he who will bless himself on earth will bless himself in
the right God.**

24\. in Deo amen, that is, by the faithful or true God. For amen is
adjectively increasing. As if to say: The hypocrites also bless, boast
and praise themselves; but the Christians alone bless themselves in Deo
amen \[\"in the right GOD\"\], who cannot deceive.

\(25\) Further, he added the word amen, first of all, because of the
astonishment of faith; for on both sides the contradiction is before the
eyes. For the blessing of the godly is hidden in faith, just as the
curse of the wicked is hidden. For they generally surpass the godly in
riches, dignities and honor 2c. But here he affirms our faith, as if to
say: You must not doubt my promise; although you do not stand the
blessing, and rather feel the curse, yet you are truly blessed in God,
who is amen, who will not deceive you.

26 Secondly, he adds \"in God amen,\" for the sake of the aversion to
the object of faith, that is, for the sake of the incarnation of Christ.
For this is an insurmountable vexation to the Jews, that we believe in a
man, and in a crucified one at that. Therefore he says: \"The Jews are
offended by the humanity of Christ, and cannot believe that he is God,
of whom they see that he is man. But you should not be offended by this;
he will not depart from the true God who keeps his eyes fixed on Christ.
Yes, there is no other way to come to the knowledge of God than in this
man and through this man, Jesus Christ, as he says to Philip, who asked:
\"Lord, show us the truth of God.

[824 **XXIII, 264-266.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. 65, 16-19.
**W. VI, I8W-1326.** 825]{.underline}

us the Father\": \"Philip, he who sees me sees my Father\" \[Joh. 14, 8.
9I. This Christ alone is the way and the truth, apart from which one
cannot find God.

27 Furthermore, a theologian must be commanded by this passage, so that
we do not get bogged down with speculations about the majesty and works
of God\'s wisdom, which is something highly dangerous. Therefore, one
must fix one\'s eyes solely on the incarnate Christ. He can be seen, but
no one has ever seen God.

**For the previous fear is forgotten.**

\(28\) This is an excellent passage for understanding other similar
passages where the prophets speak of the kingdom of Christ as eternal
life. But the matter is this: the kingdom of faith and the life to come
are distinguished from one another, not in the matter, but in the manner
of the matter. For we are now the children of God, as John says \[1 Ep.
3:2\], but in hope; for it has not yet appeared. For he that believeth
hath forgiveness of sins already. If he has forgiveness of sins, he has
life, and that is eternal life.

Therefore we are truly in the kingdom of life, we already reign, we are
already seated in heaven, we are already saved, but in hope, because
eternal life and blessedness already began when Christ took the kingdom
from the Jews, since he was now raised from death. Therefore, whoever
believes in Christ already has and possesses the same.

\(30\) But you may say, How is it that we are said to have such great
goods, when we not only do not feel them, but rather feel the opposite?
I answer: As long as we still live in this body and are subject to all
evils, we see through a mirror in a dark word \[1 Cor. 13:12\]. For this
present skin with which we are surrounded, this flesh with which we are
weighed down, does not really belong to the kingdom of Christ, because
it is still subject to sin and death. However, it must be exercised
until we cast it off, and as long as we live, it must be pressed and
weighed down.

\(31\) Therefore, it is from the defect of this skin and flesh of ours
that we are sometimes troubled by the sensation of a terrified
conscience, sin, death, the devil, hell, and the world. And this feeling
does not belong to the kingdom of Christ, but to the skin, which is like
a sack in which such a great treasure is enclosed. But it would be
unreasonable to estimate the value of the treasure according to the
small sack in which it lies, but Christ\'s kingdom, eternal life and
blessedness lie beyond our eyes and senses in Christ alone; in him
salvation, peace and life are true, although we do not yet feel these
goods because of this sack with which we are clothed. For thus says the
prophet, that the kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of blessing;
consequently it is also a kingdom of righteousness, of blessedness, and
of life, against sin, death, and the law.

\(32\) Therefore it is emphatically spoken that he says, \"The former
fear is forgotten. In the eyes of God, the matter is truly like this,
but in our eyes and in the eyes of the competition, it is not yet like
this, but the fear still lasts, and lasts until we put off this flesh.
However, we wait in hope, and through faith we already have salvation.
For the new heaven is already created, but according to the promise. But
it has not yet been created for us, precisely for the sake of the
ceiling. The other passages of the other prophets must be treated in the
same way, where they speak as gloriously of the bodily life of believers
as of the life to come.

**V. 17-19 For behold, I will create new heavens and a new earth.**

This new heaven has already been created before God, but we do not yet
see it for the sake of our flesh in which we live (as I have said). But
it must be noted that if the kingdom of Christ and Christianity are
outside of this heaven and outside of this earth, then it follows that
the ceremonies and what external things there are are not Christianity,
but only belong to this life in which we are now, for the sake of our
flesh.

826 L. XXIII, 286-269. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
IS2S-1SSS. 827

for the sake of it. For the kingdom of Christ is not only out of this
heaven, but out of all understanding. As long as we are clothed in this
sackcloth of the flesh, we are prisoners: we do not do what we want to
do, and we do what we do not want to do, as Paul complains in Rom. 7:19.
For this is our nature: as long as we live, we feel sin, death and hell.

But the kingdom of Christ is something completely different. Whoever
wants to enter it must abandon all sensation and be transferred to a
place where there are no senses. For one must not judge according to the
senses. Therefore, if your conscience accuses you of sin, if it brings
the wrath of God before your eyes, if it snatches Christ the Redeemer
from you, you should not agree with it, but judge against your
conscience and against your senses, so that God will not be angry and
you will not be condemned. For the Scripture says that the kingdom of
Christ is apart from the senses; therefore we must judge against our
senses. For our treasure and our heart shall be in peace and assured of
life, for it shall be with Christ in heaven.

35 And this is the joy of which he speaks here. We taste it when we
believe. For these are only the firstfruits of the Spirit \[Rom. 8:23\]
and a tasting of the kingdom of Christ, not a contemplative life, nor
raptures, as the monks teach, for these commonly come from the devil;
but they consist in a certainty of faith, so that when you feel your
sin, you can say that your sin is forgiven you through Jesus Christ your
Lord, in whom you believe. And these firstfruits of the Spirit are felt
by the one who, when he is afflicted by a severe and violent temptation,
and is already close to despair and death, can strengthen himself
through the Holy Spirit that his sins are forgiven, that he thus
overcomes the insurmountable stings of Satan, so that he is not
completely swallowed up by sin. We feel these firstfruits of the Spirit
as far as the kingdom of Christ is in us.

\(36\) Furthermore, under the kingdom of sin, that is, according to the
sense of our flesh, everything is the antitype. For there death seems to
be

to be without life, the word without grace, the law without fulfillment.
These are horrible images of death that hover before our eyes as long as
we live in this flesh. However, the firstfruits of the Spirit overcome
these terrifying images, because they teach us that we should fix our
eyes unwaveringly on Christ, who by his death triumphed over the law,
over sin, over death, over hell, over Satan.

**V. 20. There shall be no more children who do not attain their days.**

This is a contrast, as it were. This will be a different kingdom than
the one under Moses. For the law led no one to perfection. Consequently,
doing the law and works, striving for one\'s own righteousness and
wisdom does not help at all. For those who are instructed in the school
of the law always remain \"boys\", they remain in servile fear, they do
not attain to this joy. Therefore he speaks: I will destroy the school
of the law, and establish the school of grace, in which the baptized, as
soon as they are incorporated into Christ by faith, will be wise, and
have these treasures of which I have spoken. They are not visible, but
they are in the word, through faith. But notice this description, that
the disciples of the law are \"boys\". Therefore, the longer those who
are outside of Christ study, the more childish they become; the more
holy they live, the greater sinners they are. Thus a monk of a hundred
years is not so wise as to think that his record is nothing 2c.

38 He does not reject the knowledge of the law outright (for it is good
and necessary in civil life), but only this presumption that one thinks
it is sufficient for justice.

Thus those \"boys\" are whom the world considers to be the holiest,
best, cleverest and wisest 2c. But here the judgment is made that they
are not to be admitted to the kingdom of Christ.

**V. 21. They will build houses.**

40 \"Building\" here does not mean so much as putting together a pile of
stones or wood-.

**828 L. xxm, 269-271.** brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 65, 21-24.
**W. vi, 1329-1331. 829**

but to create, establish and expand households. Therefore he indicates
that from one church ten others will arise, so that the number of
believers will always increase. What he said above \[v. 17\] about the
creation of a new heaven fits more to the spiritual kingdom of Christ,
but this more to this bodily life. Thus the kingdom of Christ is a
kingdom in itself, because of the head that reigns, but to us it is not
yet a kingdom because of this skin of ours.

**V. 22. They shall not build for another to inhabit.**

No godless person has a share in the fruits and gifts of the church;
believers alone can comfort, instruct, admonish, and teach themselves
and others. This is how it is today with those who can talk gloriously
about the gospel, but because they are without faith (as can be seen
from their works), they have only chaff, they do not taste the wheat and
the true word.

**For the days of my people will be like the days of a tree.**

\(42\) As it is written in the first Psalm, v. 3, 4: \"He is like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, which yields its fruit in its season.
But such are not the wicked, but as the chaff which the wind
scattereth,\" and like the grass upon the housetops they shall perish
\[Ps. 129:6\].

**And the work of their hands will grow old with my chosen ones.**

43\. that is, they will remain for and for, as it says in the first
Psalm, v. 2: \"His leaves do not wither.\"

**V. 23. They shall not labor in vain.**

44 Here one must take the contrast to help. The wicked labor, but in
vain. The wicked beget children, but in vain; and both their labor and
the fruit of their labor are accursed. On the other hand, the godly
labor in such a way that they do not feel the labor, and their labor is
not in vain.

**Still giving birth untimely.**

\(45\) By this he means that all actions, all teachings, all
righteousness, and all works that are without and against the word are
useless and, as it were, \"an untimely birth,\" \"since nothing
righteous ever comes of it. For this is what the word \[XXXXX\] actually
means.

V. 24. **And it shall come to pass, before they call, that I will
answer.**

46 This is before they finish their cry, as Moses did at the Red Sea
\[Exodus 14:15\]. This is a necessary promise to strengthen the
conscience and to encourage the heart to pray. But like other promises,
this one is hidden and will only be fulfilled in faith.

In order that our prayer may be heard, it is first of all useful to know
that we are in the word and in the kingdom of Christ, and that we are
not hindered by the fact that we are in the outward skin, which tastes
of its origin and retains the odor of the sin with which it is infected
and even corrupted. But our glory and comfort is this, that the Word
lifts us outside this skin into another heaven. Therefore, we should
not, because of our sins, either throw away our confidence in prayer or
despise our prayer as if it were displeasing and vain to God, but we
should rather insist on the opposite, and say: Although conscience
contradicts, nevertheless, because I have baptism and the Word and the
sacrament of the altar, I belong to the kingdom of Christ, and am truly
bone of Christ\'s legs, and flesh of Christ\'s flesh. This presumption
and arrogance (that I call it so) must be grasped in the heart, not as a
merit, but as a free gift given by grace; and then prayer will also be
pleasant and answered, if the heart is thus instructed and strengthened
by trust in the death and merit of Christ.

\(48\) But there are many and great causes that encourage us to pray.
For not only are we afflicted by our own sins, but also all the ills of
the world are upon us.

834 L. XXIII. 275-277. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1337-1340. 835

6 Therefore, one must diligently pay attention to how the prophet
treated this passage, in which he deprives his people, who had a worship
and a temple that had been established by God Himself and confirmed with
the most lovely promises, of trusting in the promises and in the Word of
God.

7 But he does it in such a way that there are two kinds of divine
promises. Some promises promise something absolutely, without any
condition. And such promises are those peculiar to the gospel, of
Christ, which belong to the victory over sin and death. Of this kind is
the one that happened to Adam in Paradise, and others that promise
eternal life and salvation from sin and death through Christ. With
these, there is no condition, so that hearts may place their trust all
the more securely in Christ and entrust the blessedness of their souls
to him, as Peter says \[1 Ep. 1, 13, 9\], and so that all glory may be
based on God\'s unified and pure goodness and mercy, which has been
shown to us in Christ. For these promises have been offered to us
without any conditions, because they are free of charge and, as Paul
says \[Rom. 11, 29\], may not repent of God.

8\. other promises are legal ones, to which the condition word \"if\" is
added, that is, the condition of our work 2c., as: If ye will keep my
covenant, then shall ye be my people 2c. \[Therefore the Jews err in
making an unconditional promise out of a conditional promise, and think
that God will keep His covenant without fail, even though they deviate
from the covenant and do the opposite. But there are certain clear
sayings in Moses and other prophets in which God threatens to reject the
people with all worship if they do not keep His covenant.

\(9\) What could have been said more clearly than what Jeremiah says in
Cap. 7:4 ff: \"Do not rely on the lies when they say, \'Here is the
Lord\'s temple, here is the Lord\'s temple, here is the Lord\'s temple!
But

Amend your lives and your ways, that ye do right one against another,
and do no violence to strangers, orphans, or widows, nor shed innocent
blood in this place, nor follow after other gods, to your own hurt: and
I will dwell with you in this place for ever, in the land which I gave
unto your fathers\" 2c. And soon after, v. 13 ff: \"Because I preach
unto you continually, and ye will not hear, I call unto you, and ye will
not answer: therefore will I do unto the house which is called by my
name, in which ye rely, and unto the place which I gave unto your
fathers, even as I did unto Shiloh. And I will cast you out of my sight,
as I have cast out all your brethren, all the seed of Ephraim\" 2c. Such
sayings are found now and then very much. For since this promise was
conditional, the promise must necessarily cease, because the condition
ceased. Therefore, the trust that remains after the condition has been
removed is a mere human trust, which God hates and in which he has
abhorrence. Thus Jerusalem is called the holy city because of the word
of God that it had. Now that the word has ceased to be there, it is no
longer holy, but unholy. Therefore, if they had kept the covenant of
God, the temple would have remained as promised; but because they did
not keep it, the temple and all the worship of the Law perished, or the
Romans would never have destroyed Jerusalem.

\(10\) Therefore, this passage argues against the trust in the promise,
which has already been abrogated; and the Jews are punished that, since
they themselves have not kept the covenant, they nevertheless demand of
God that he should keep the covenant, just as today our adversaries
boast excellently of the promises that the church has, that Peter\'s
faith will never cease, that Christ will remain with his church until
the end of the world. Well, we do not deny that this is true; indeed, we
ourselves have this certain consolation, in the face of so great a
raging of the world and of Satan, that the clear promises are
thereChrist is sitting at the right hand of God, and will

[**836** L. xxin, 277-Wv. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 66, 1. W.
vi, 1340-1344. **837**]{.underline}

stand by the church, since it is thus in danger for the sake of the
Word.

Why then do we despise our adversaries? Why do we fight against them and
promise ourselves that they will perish? Certainly because they are not
the church. But let them first begin to become the church, and then we
will grant them that they can safely rely on the promises that the
church has. How should those deserve the name of the church who first
deny the head of the church, Christ, and ascribe those benefits that
belong to Christ alone to our services and merits, and then not only do
not teach God\'s word, but also impose the cruelest punishments on the
teachers of the word? Hence it follows that, although they have the
sacraments, they cannot use them lawfully, nor understand their power
and truth. In addition to this, there is also the outward habit of life,
which is of such a nature that it is absolutely worthy of such an
ungodly doctrine. But we have said and written much else about this.
Therefore, the name of the church and the trust in the promises of the
church do not help them any more than the name of the people of God, the
temple and the law helped the Jews.

**V. 1. Thus says the Lord: Heaven is my throne.**

12\. as if to say, Who are you who want to do me a special service in
this temple built by the hands of men? Do you think that I am enclosed
between these walls of the temple, and sit there as a prisoner, as it
were, waiting for your sacrifices, which you offer here, and thereby
forsake righteousness, keep neither faith nor loyalty, and commit all
kinds of shame and vices? as he reckoned with the Jews Ps. 50:13, 16 ff.
For sacrifices are not pleasing to God unless they are offered by a
person who is righteous and pleasing to Him beforehand. But if the
person is evil, the works, even though they are not evil in and of
themselves, are nevertheless evil and condemned.

\(13\) Hilarius has explained this passage about the divine majesty, and
has treated it very well, that God\'s feet touch the earth, but the
loins are outside of heaven, that is, that God has his seat outside of
the world, and yet sets his feet on the earth, which is the lowest and
the center of the world, that God is inside, outside, and beyond the
world, and that nothing is more outside and beyond the world, nor more
inside and on this side of the world, than God. This is very well said;
but you know my advice that the inexperienced do not handle such
thoughts of the divine majesty without the most serious danger.
Therefore, one should not philosophize much here, as he reminded us, and
turn one\'s eyes to Christ who became man. For there is no safer way, as
I have often said, if one wants to avoid all the dangerous rocks on
which the heretics have been shipwrecked, than by remaining with Christ
who became man and lies in the cradle. By these thoughts a Christian
must grow and increase, as it were by milk food. But the thoughts of the
divine majesty plunge the weak souls into an abyss.

In the meantime, we can use these and other similar sayings to fortify
our faith, so that we do not, as it were, lock God in a cage from which
he cannot leave, as those did who at the beginning impiously argued
against us about the presence of the body of Christ in the sacrament of
the altar. It is enough that one learns this from the divine majesty,
that it is impossible for it to be grasped by any man; which I have
experienced with great danger for myself. For there is no one, either in
or out of the church, who, under the guidance of reason, could conceive
anything rightly, except in worldly government and in domestic affairs.
For these are the limits of our reason; it goes no further. For these
two things are subjected to us in the second chapter of the first book
of Moses. But he who wants to instruct souls by reason leads himself and
others into error. For we can teach only hands and feet, that is, things
that the worldly rule and

834 L. XXIII. 275-277. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1337-1340. 835

\(6\) Therefore, one must pay careful attention to how the prophet
treated this passage, in which he deprives his people, who had a worship
service and a temple that had been established by God Himself and
confirmed with the most loving promises, of trusting in the promises and
in the word of God.

7 But he does it in such a way that there are two kinds of divine
promises. Some promises promise something absolutely, without any
condition. And such promises are those peculiar to the gospel, of
Christ, which belong to the victory over sin and death. Of this kind is
the one that happened to Adam in Paradise, and others that promise
eternal life and salvation from sin and death through Christ. With these
there is no condition, so that the hearts may place their trust all the
more securely in Christ and entrust the blessedness of their souls to
him, as Peter says \[1 Ep. I, 13. 9.\], and so that all glory may be
based on the unified and pure goodness and mercy of God, which has been
shown to us in Christ. For these promises, because they are free of
charge by grace, and, as Paul says \[Rom. 11, 29\], may not repent of
God, have been offered to us without any condition whatsoever.

8\. other promises are legal ones, to which the condition word \"if\" is
added, that is, the condition of our work 2c., as: If ye will keep my
covenant, then shall ye be my people 2c. Mos. 19, 5.\] Therefore the
Jews err in making an unconditional promise out of a conditional one,
and think that God will keep His covenant without fail, even though they
deviate from the covenant and do the opposite. But there are certain
clear sayings in Moses and other prophets in which God threatens to
reject the people with all worship if they do not keep His covenant.

\(9\) What could be said more clearly than what Jeremiah says in Cap.
7:4 ff: \"Do not rely on the lies when they say, \'Here is the temple of
the Lord, here is the temple of the Lord, here is the temple of the
Lord! But

Amend your lives and your ways, that ye do right one against another,
and do no violence to strangers, orphans, or widows, nor shed innocent
blood in this place, nor go after other gods to your own hurt; and I
will dwell with you in this place for ever, in the land which I gave
unto your fathers\" 2c. And soon after, v. 13 ff: \"Because I preach
unto you continually, and ye will not hear, I call unto you, and ye will
not answer: therefore will I do unto the house which is called by my
name, in which ye rely, and unto the place which I gave unto your
fathers, even as I did unto Shiloh. And I will cast you out of my sight,
as I have cast out all your brethren, all the seed of Ephraim\" 2c. Such
sayings are found now and then very much. For since this promise was
conditional, the promise must necessarily cease, because the condition
ceased. Therefore, the trust that remains after the condition has been
removed is a mere human trust, which God hates and in which he has
abhorrence. Thus Jerusalem is called the holy city because of the word
of God that it had. Now that the word has ceased to be there, it is no
longer holy, but unholy. Therefore, if they had kept the covenant of
God, the temple would have remained as promised, but because they did
not keep it, the temple and all the services of the Law perished, or the
Romans would never have destroyed Jerusalem.

\(10\) Therefore, this passage argues against the trust in the promise,
which has already been abrogated; and the Jews are punished that, since
they themselves have not kept the covenant, they nevertheless demand of
God that he should keep the covenant, just as today our adversaries
boast excellently of the promises that the church has, that Peter\'s
faith will never cease, that Christ will remain with his church until
the end of the world. Well, we do not deny that this is true; indeed, we
ourselves have this certain consolation, in the face of so great a
raging of the world and of Satan, that the clear promises are
thereChrist is sitting at the right hand of God, and will

[**836 L. xxin, 277-Wv.** Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 66, 1.
**W.** vi, **1340-1344. 837**]{.underline}

stand by the church, since it is thus in danger for the sake of the
Word.

Why then do we despise our adversaries? Why do we fight against them and
promise ourselves that they will perish? Certainly because they are not
the church. But let them first begin to become the church, and then we
will grant them that they can safely rely on the promises that the
church has. How should those deserve the name of the church who first
deny the head of the church, Christ, and ascribe those benefits that
belong to Christ alone to our services and merits, and then not only do
not teach God\'s word, but also impose the cruelest punishments on the
teachers of the word? Hence it follows that, although they have the
sacraments, they cannot use them lawfully, nor understand their power
and truth. In addition to this, there is also the outward habit of life,
which is of such a nature that it is absolutely worthy of such an
ungodly doctrine. But we have said and written much else about this.
Therefore, the name of the church and the trust in the promises of the
church do not help them any more than the name of the people of God, the
temple and the law helped the Jews.

**V. 1. Thus says the Lord: Heaven is my throne.**

12\. as if to say, Who are you who want to do me a special service in
this temple built by the hands of men? Do you think that I am enclosed
between these walls of the temple, and sit there as a prisoner, as it
were, waiting for your sacrifices, which you offer here, and thereby
forsake righteousness, do not keep faith and do not glorify, and commit
all kinds of shame and vices? as he was talking to the Jews Ps. 50, 13.
16. ff. For sacrifices are not pleasing to God unless they are offered
by a person who is righteous and pleasing to Him beforehand. But if the
person is evil, the works, even though they are not evil in and of
themselves, are nevertheless evil and condemned.

\(13\) Hilarius has explained this passage about the divine majesty, and
has treated it very well, that God\'s feet touch the earth, but the
loins are outside of heaven, that is, that God has his seat outside of
the world, and yet sets his feet on the earth, which is the lowest and
the center of the world, that God is inside, outside, and beyond the
world, and that nothing is more outside and beyond the world, nor more
inside and on this side of the world, than God. This is very well said;
but you know my advice that the inexperienced do not handle such
thoughts of the divine majesty without the most serious danger.
Therefore, one should not philosophize much here, as he reminded us, and
turn one\'s eyes to Christ who became man. For there is no safer way, as
I have often said, if one wants to avoid all the dangerous rocks on
which the heretics have been shipwrecked, than by remaining with Christ
who became man and lies in the cradle. By these thoughts a Christian
must grow and increase, as it were by milk food. But the thoughts of the
divine majesty plunge the weak souls into an abyss.

In the meantime, we can use these and other similar sayings to fortify
our faith, so that we do not, as it were, lock God in a cage from which
he cannot leave, as those did who at the beginning impiously argued
against us about the presence of the body of Christ in the sacrament of
the altar. It is enough that one learns this from the divine majesty,
that it is impossible for it to be grasped by any man; which I have
experienced with great danger for myself. For there is no one, either in
or out of the church, who, under the guidance of reason, could conceive
anything rightly, except in worldly government and in domestic affairs.
For these are the limits of our reason; it goes no further. For these
two things are subjected to us in the second chapter of the first book
of Moses. But he who wants to instruct souls by reason leads himself and
others into error. For we can teach only hands and feet, that is, things
that the worldly rule and

838 D. xxm, 280-282. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1341-1347.
839

the housekeeping 1). But theology is learned nowhere else than with
Jesus, the child who is in the cradle, with whom we must grow up
gradually until we become perfect men \[Eph. 4:13\].

\(15\) Therefore, I would rather take this passage to mean that
everything we are, have and are able to do, we have from God. Therefore,
we can repay Him nothing but the most simple confession. For we have
received everything else from Him. Now, however, we do the contradiction
that the prophet indicates here in a concealed way. We conceal the fact
that we have received everything from God, and make God a beggar who
needs our works; yes, we even demand from God a deserved reward for our
deeds and works.

\(16\) But it is great foolishness, indeed, the utmost impiety, to boast
of merit, since we have not only received the power to do something, but
even the breath and the spirit of life from God. For he wants us to keep
not only the second tablet, but also the first commandment, so that we
recognize that he is our God, through whose benefits we are sustained
and of which we are in need. He himself, however, is not in need of our
deeds, but our neighbor is in need of our good deeds, not God. If we now
recognize that we have received everything from God, and as a sign of
this recognition we do the commandments of the second tablet, that we
obey our parents, not kill, 2c., then even the most seemingly
insignificant works are pleasing to God for the sake of the first
commandment. But this the Jews did not do; there was no fear of God with
them, no trust in God, and yet they wanted to become righteous through
their sacrifices and other acts of worship. Therefore, he punished them
and abolished the highest religion, which he himself had established,
yes, he rejected it.

17 Furthermore, because he here condemns the temple and the Jewish
worship, it is clear that he condemns at the same time the highest
righteousness and the greatest religion on which the Pabstacy is based
today. For if the sacrifices, which were instituted by God Himself, did
not make righteous, by the fact that only

1\) Erlanger: oeeonomia instead of: osoonoraioa.

the mere work was accomplished (ex opere operato), is it not the utmost
folly to hope to attain righteousness by works of one\'s own choosing,
which are instituted without, nay, contrary to, the Word of God?

**What kind of house are you going to build for me?**

18 As if he wanted to say: I will dwell in your hearts \[1 Cor. 6,
19.\], but you think that I can be enclosed between stones. I will dwell
in the temple in such a way that I will also dwell in your hearts. Since
you cast me out of your hearts, I will not dwell in the temple. St.
Stephen also treats this passage in this way \[Apost. 7, 48. ff\].

**V. 2. My hand has made all that is there.**

19 Thus he speaks to the monk who is puffed up **because of** his
watchfulness, fasting, chastity 2c: Dear one, where did you get this
gift, that you can watch, fast and abstain like this? Did you not get it
from me? Why then dost thou defy me with that which thou hast received
of me? This is a great foolishness that God cannot stand, that **He**
should accept from us again as benefits what He Himself has given us.
Thus it is said in Ps. 50, 8. ff: \"Because of your sacrifice I do not
punish you\" 2c.

**But I look at the wretched man, and he is broken in spirit.**

20 Here, the prophet explains where God wants to dwell, which is His
true workshop, in which God tends to have His work, namely a broken
spirit. Therefore, when one feels sadness of spirit and the heart is
contrite, we should rejoice and be glad. But these things are too great
to be believed by a human heart at the time when it is in contention.
For what are all the palaces of the world, even heaven and earth,
against a contrite heart, since it is a dwelling place of the divine
majesty? Thus it is said in the 34th Psalm, v. 19: \"The Lord is near to
them that are of a broken heart, and helpeth them that are of a contrite
spirit.\" Des-

**840** 2 xxiii, 282-284. brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 66, 2. w.
vi, 1347-1350. **841.**

v\. 20: \"The righteous must suffer many things, but the Lord helps him
out of them all.\"

For one cannot come to the knowledge of Christ in any other way than
through tribulations, and when someone suffers, only then is the place,
time and space there to help. For the tribulations are the right
material (materia), and the nothingness out of which God uses to make
something. For God works in such a thing that lacks something, but not
in such a thing that already is something (in materia privativa, non
positiva).

22 Because the prophet speaks here of justification, he does not
understand bodily afflictions, but the feeling of sin, death, and
conscience. Therefore he rejects the greatest merits, namely the temple,
and praises life without law; he turns his face to those who have not
earned it and who are not worthy of it; who feel not righteousness but
sin, not peace but terror of conscience.

Therefore, we should not despair when we have fallen into sins and grave
errors, but allow ourselves to be uplifted by such comforts, and then
believe, when we feel it least, that God looks upon us, helps us, and is
gracious to us. 2c.

**And who is afraid of my word.**

24.^c^ ) Here you see what God requires for a service, namely that we
should fear His word. But this is the law and the rule of the wicked,
\"that there is no fear of God in them\" \[Ps. 36, 2. Rom. 3, 18.\], as
we see in our adversaries, who are so defiant, obstinate and sure that
nothing can be conceived that goes beyond it. The terrors of the law and
of sin, about which we complain so much, are a mere fairy tale to them.

25 From the contrast, therefore, we will easily understand what it means
to \"stand before God\".

c\) Instead of §§ 24-26, the 1532 edition has the following: The wicked
are secure, stiff-necked, and defiant, without fear of GOD; but the
godly are downcast and full of fear at the word of GOD; they are
terrified of the law and the threats of GOD, whereas they ought to align
themselves by the promises.

The word \"fear\" means that the godly are not secure, but honor and
fear God, lest they offend Him in some way. If they have been overtaken
by a sin, they tremble and fear, as if God were standing behind their
backs with a club, wanting to punish them for their sin. Those who are
thus terrified (says the prophet), who suffer thus, these I look upon.
But the wicked in their security I hate, and turn away my face from
them. For these boast of their worship, and fear nothing. If someone
reminds them of the Ten Commandments, they despise them, as if they had
already worn them, as they say, on their shoes; consider themselves
blissful, and let themselves dream of a perfection that they would have
reached even beyond the commandments of God. Therefore, they are not
afraid of any word of God, nor of any of their works. But the godly and
the truly righteous are always afraid and feel that their conscience is
troubled.

26\. this is useful for us to know, so that we may learn that the hearts
of Christians are anxious and fearful, so that when the hour of fear
should come, we may not despair because of it, but when all hope is
gone, and when the wrath of God is present, we may lift ourselves up,
and remember that at that time we are truly a workshop of God, in which
God can accomplish his work, which Paul attributes to him Rom. 4, 17.
ascribes to him, \"that he may call that which is not, that it may be\"
2c.

\(27\) If any one wishes to distinguish these things accurately, let him
make the distinction that \"to fear\" is as much as to have a conscience
made fearful by the law; \"the broken spirit\" is as much as to have and
feel sin; \"misery,\" to feel death and hell. Further, \"to look upon\"
is as much as to show oneself loving and kind. For those who are
afflicted by the law have before them the back of God. This outward
appearance (aspectui) is met here by the Holy Spirit, who says: \"It is
not as you think; remove this appearance from your eyes, for I look upon
you, I am gracious to you; I do not hate you, as you falsely imagine.

[842 L. XXIII, 285-287. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I350-ISS3. 843]{.underline}

**V. 3. for he who slaughters an ox 1).**

\(28\) Hitherto he rejected the temple; now he also rejects the use and
works of the temple. But he cites gross sins, such as \"killing a man,\"
\"sacrificing a dog, or sow\'s blood,\" 2c. because the hypocrites did
not understand spiritual sins, such as robbing God of the honor of His
deity, making themselves God 2c. For sacrifice was the best among human
works, and also commanded by GOD; and yet he says: it is as great an
abomination if someone sacrifices with the presumption that it is enough
if he only performs the work, and thus makes GOD a beggar, as if someone
commits murder. It is not that God rejects the sacrifices out of hand,
but because they are presumptuous and do not fear His word, because they
abandon the commandments and despise grace. In this way, God is not so
much offended by the greatest sin in the sight of the world as by the
highest righteousness, and He accuses those who are the most holy in
appearance of being the most unholy. Thus, the monks, as often as they
say mass, commit a more grievous sin than if they committed murder. For
the mass is a blasphemous work 2c. These are great thunderbolts against
the righteousness of works.

**Such they choose in their ways.**

29\. They had received the sacrifices from Moses, so they are not their
ways! I answer: He calls the sacrifices \"their ways\" because they did
the same with omission of the divine commandments and the ways of God,
that is, without faith and without fear, as if they thereby earned
righteousness.

**V. 4. Therefore I will also choose.**

30 So they themselves sought their own righteousness. Christ accepted
the sinners, as, the Zacchaeus and Magdalene, the centurion, the thief
on the cross. They feared to break the Sabbath; he broke it freely,
along with all the other statutes. So it is also with

1\) The Wittenberg has correctly according to the Vulgate: boV6va,
whereas the Jena and the ErlangenOV68.

happened to us. It was considered an abomination to go out of the
monastery; now you go out freely.

31\. instead of: Illusiones orum eligam is more correctly translated:
Hoc, quod horrent isti, \"for that they shun light,\" that is, I will
freely do that which they hold fearfully and with danger of conscience,
that they may fear where there is nothing to fear, and be secure where
there is the greatest danger, as it says in the 53rd Psalm, v. 6.

**Therefore, that I called.**

32.^d^ ) This is the reason why he rejects their doings and services,
all of them, even those commanded by God Himself. Similar passages are
Jer. 7, 13: I call you and you will not answer; and Ps. 50, 16. It is
just as if he said today: When you were baptized, I did not speak to you
of your ordinances and rules, but that you should hear me. Now because
ye transgress my covenant, and forsake my word, I will do unto you in
like manner 2c.

\(33\) This, therefore, is the only guilt which he condemns through all
the prophets, and which today our Germany also incurs, that it \[the
people\] has not heard; rather, they say: We hear, because we sacrifice
according to the law of Moses; we do other things than Moses commanded
us to do. But what do you make of the first commandment, in which you
hear: I am the LORD your God 2c.? Just as the Jews had to suffer their
punishments because they did not hear God in his prophets, so Germany
will certainly be punished because of this contempt.

**V. 5. Your brothers.**

\(34\) Those who boast of the same God, the same word, the same law with
you, persecute you even more, since you are already afflicted enough.
Notice that our brothers are our enemies. Thus Christ was betrayed by
Judah, who was his disciple and ate his bread.

d\) Instead of §§ 32 and 33, the 1532 edition offers: This is the guilt,
as above \[v. 30: This will happen to you because you do not hear my
word; you continue stubbornly in your ways and abominations.

[844 L. xxln, 287-28p. Brief interpretation on Isaiah, cap. 66, 5-9. W.
VI. I3S3-I3SS. 845]{.underline}

**Speak: Let us see how glorious the Lord is.**

These are exceedingly bitter, imitated speeches, with which godless men
challenge the Christ who is weak in his members, and as if they were
certainly children of God, they mock the godly, as if they were damned,
just as now also the blasphemers mock the afflicted, and say: What are
you crying for? the Christ of the Lutherans will help you. Such
blasphemies can no longer be overlooked, but punishment will soon
follow, just as immediately after the blasphemy on the cross, great
darkness followed and the earth shook \[Matt. 27:39, 45, 52\].

**They shall be put to shame.**

\(36\) This is a brief but very emphatic and pleasing consolation for
those who, for the sake of the Word, not only endure the hatred of many
people, but are also banished, as we are today.

37 This prophecy was fulfilled in the last destruction by the Romans,
because they did not have a simple war, but there was also turmoil among
the besieged, but it will also be fulfilled in us today, because we live
in the same sins.

**V. 6. a voice from the temple.**

38 Thus we read that even in the temple there was fighting against the
Jews.

**V. 7: She gives birth before she suffers.**

This is a good comfort for the church, which is very necessary in this
present time of ours. It seems as if she will perish absolutely, she is
in the midst of death and sins, that there is no hope at all that she
will have children; and yet he promises that before she feels that she
is pregnant, she shall have many children, as above \[Cap. 49:21\]: \"I
am barren. Who brought these up for me?\" Thus the apostles, according
to outward appearance, were only remnants and yeasts of the people, and
in fact only sheep for slaughter; yet in a short time they filled the
whole earth with the teaching of the Gospel. Philip converted Samaria
\[Apost. 8, 5. ff.\], Paul learned that, before he

came to Rome, where Christians were fApost. 28, 15.\]. So in our time
the birth happened before we realized that we were pregnant. We did not
even think about what has happened now through the word. The wicked also
conceive, but not with childbirth, but with calamity and harm; but they
bear a defect, as it is said in the 7th Psalm, v. 15, and stubble. But
this is also to be applied to how we are minded, that everything we
expect from the future is unfruitful. But it is given to us (as the
127th Psalm, v. 2, says) in our sleep, and when we do not even suspect
it, before the woe comes to us.

**She has recovered a boy before her child\'s need comes.**

40\. she has recovered \"of a boy\", not of a maiden; for she is
unskilled in the administration of both bodily and spiritual things. But
it is not before our eyes. For our strength is apart from us, in Christ.
And we do not see our treasure, but have it only in the word, which is
grasped and believed by us.

**V. 8: Can a nation be born at the same time before a country suffers
woe?**

41\. He has the contrast in mind. The godless Jews are also pregnant,
but they give birth to stubble prepared for fire. So today also the
pabstium is pregnant, but it will give birth to stubble prepared for
fire. Thus all the plots of the wicked are like an untimely birth. But
the godly give birth without pain, that is, they have the blessing.

**V. 9. Should I let others break the mother, and not also give birth
myself?**

This passage has been explained in many ways, and I think that Hilarius
also interpreted it from the divine majesty, that the power to give
birth is given to all by divine power. But I take it from the spiritual
procreation through the Word that they are words of God who became man.
As if to say: I seem to be barren, having been crucified and having
died; nevertheless, I too have given birth to my children.

[846 **L. XXIII, 289-292. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1356-1359.** 847]{.underline}

children. For as I give children to others, so will I also reserve seed
for myself. But because he separates his childbearing from the
childbearing of others, he points to the birth to eternal life. He
confesses that the mother seems to be closed to the world. For Christ
looks as if he were weak and nothing; but much more do his children look
so. And yet it is heard in the Word, and believed in faith, that he is
strong, and that he will have his seed. Therefore, he will remain with
his church and keep it intact until the end of the world.

**V. 10: Rejoice with Jerusalem.**

43 Here he indicates to whom he is speaking, namely to the afflicted.
\"All of you who are saddened by her,\" he says. Consequently, the
figure of the Church is sad, and it does not have the appearance of
remaining or giving birth.

**V.11. For this you shall suck and be filled.**

He presents us as little children who should suck comfort from their
breasts. What these \"breasts\" are, no one understands who has not been
in some great temptation. The Church is to remain in the world under the
cross and under death, and yet she is to have \"breasts of glory.\"
Therefore, our treasures and our glory are not bodily things. For the
greater the assurance of faith, the more glory and comfort in the Holy
Spirit there is also.

**V. 12: Behold, I am spreading peace among her like a river.**

This is a magnificent description of the peace that he promises to the
church instead of the tribulations. But it is this peace in word and in
spirit, namely the preaching of the forgiveness of sins. The word
\"stream\" means the constant continuation, that this peace will never
cease, just as a right river never lacks water. And this is what Paul
calls Eph. 3, 18. \"comprehending the breadth, and the length, and the
depth, and the height\". If you compare the peace of the world with this
peace

The latter is like a drop of water; when it dries up, every kind of evil
remains. But a Christian has a calm heart, even if he should be in
infinite misfortune.

**You are to be carried on your side.**

46\. In the church, both shame and honor are found. Thus, there are also
persecutors and those who carry them in their arms.

**V. 13 I will comfort you as a mother comforts her child.**

There are very great movements in these words, which no one can fully
comprehend. We understand our weeping, but we do not understand that the
consolation is so great. Our hearts are so carnal. For if someone could
believe God in these temptations, who comforts through his word, he
would feel that he is more than a father and a mother to us. For what is
the temptation, though it be great and heavy, since he loves us so? But
because he promises this peace to the church, he indicates that the
church will be afflicted with the most severe sufferings. But we only
feel the suffering and judge it according to the sensation of the
present adversity, but we do not feel the consolation. For this is not
in the sensation, but in the word and faith.

\(48\) And the victory and contending of Christians is that they fight
by faith against the sensation of death and sin, and that however much
we feel sin, yet we do not succumb to sin, but believe that it has been
overcome by the death of Christ the Savior, and that nothing more can
harm us for Christ\'s sake. 2c.

**V. 14. Your bones shall be green as grass.**

\(49\) Severe trials also suck the marrow out of the bones, as David
often testifies \[Ps. 32:3, 4\]. So, on the other hand, we see that the
consolations give strength and sap to the bones. Therefore, he hereby
indicates that he wants to comfort and refresh us through the word. In
fact, all our treasures are in the word alone.

**848** L. XXIII, 292-294. brief interpretation on Isaiah, Cap. **66,
15-19.** W. VI, 1359-1362. **849**

**V. 15 For behold, the Lord will come with fire.**

50 I understand it from the devastation that happened by the Romans, the
description of which he took from the history of the second book of
Moses. However, nothing prevents to understand it also from the last
judgment. For the prophets regarded the church as if it had already been
transferred from the world to the heavenly realm. For nothing else
stands in our way but this skin with which we are surrounded, that we do
not have eternal life.

**His cars, like a weather.**

51 Thus he calls the army of the Romans, or, if drawn to the last
judgment, the army of the angels.

**V. 16. All flesh.**

It seems that Isaiah is speaking of those who despised the word in his
time and who would despise the word in Christ\'s time.

**V. 17. who sanctify and cleanse themselves.**

Superstition would not be superstition if it were not accompanied by
trust. This he touches here with the word \"sanctify\". Superstition,
however, not only denies and despises God, but it also despises the
neighbor. This is indicated by the word \"purify\". As if he wanted to
say: These people consider all their own things to be pure and clean; on
the other hand, they consider everything that others have to be impure
and unholy.

**And eat pork.**

54\. This happened in the times of Isaiah and Christ according to the
letter, but according to spiritual interpretation it still happens by
all heretics. These \"eat\", that is, teach, believe, preach \"pork and
mice\", that is, their self-chosen doctrines, which please them,
although they are forbidden by the Word of God, and are an abomination
and a disgust to God.

**V. 18. For I will come and gather their works.**

The prophets thought that as soon as Christ would come, Christ would
also come.

Kingdom will follow. Therefore, these words can be understood both from
the general downfall of the whole world at the last day and from the
special misfortune and desolation of the Jews. But I take it especially
of the judgment of the gospel, which judges both the Jews and the
Gentiles with all their works, and condemns everything that is of
religions, customs and worship apart from Christianity. And this is the
beginning of the judgment by the word, which will also soon come to
pass. Thus the prophet has, as it were, presented two pieces of judgment
at the conclusion of his prophecy: one is the abandonment of the
synagogue; the other, the calling of the Gentiles, which will last until
the end of the world.

**V. 19. And I will give a sign among them.**

\(56\) Here he adds how the Gentiles will be called, namely through the
apostles, who will gather all believers to the word of faith and the
gospel. But because he sends the remnant, he indicates that it will not
be a physical kingdom; otherwise they would remain in Jerusalem. But the
word is \"a sign\" because nothing is seen of the church in the world
but the word. For even the sacraments would be nothing if they did not
have the word.

**Gen Phul.**

The Hebrew says: \"Gen Phul\" \[instead of: In In Africam in the
Vulgate\]. I think that the side against midnight is understood, as
there are the Assyrians, the Parthians. Because I think he looks at the
promise Gen. 9, 27. that Japhet should dwell in the tents of Shem.

**To the archers.**

58\. I think it is a special nation, as the Parthians are.

**And shall proclaim my glory among the Gentiles.**

\(59\) For the office of an apostle is nothing else than to preach
Christ. For there is an emphasis in the word \"my.

850 L. xxill, 2S4-296. a \"movements on the prophets. W. VI, I362-I3SS.
851

**V.20. And shall bring all your brethren out of all the heathen\".**

Behold, the Gentiles are called brethren of the saints because of the
fellowship of the gospel.

**To the Lord for a grain offering.**

61 \[Instead of: Donum Domino In the Vulgate it is better translated Ad
oblationem Domino. But that the Gentiles should be sacrificed is as much
as that they should be converted through the gospel. For by faith the
old man is put to death, and the new man arises. Thus saith Paul, I
offer the gospel, that the Gentiles may become a sacrifice \[Rom.
15:16.\]. Further, if the apostles are the remnant, it follows that the
people perish. If the people have perished, it follows that they cannot
be the fleshly Zion.

**On horses and chariots.**

62\. that is, in the Word. For those who walk under foot are under the
law. But the life of the Christian is not under the driving of the law,
but they ride on the chariot of the promises, for they are carried in
the word.

**Just as the children of Israel bring grain offerings in a clean vessel
to the house of the LORD.**

Hereby the old sacrifices are tacitly abolished, because he speaks of
new sacrifices. He calls the word of the Gospel \"a pure vessel\"
because it is the most lovely and pure teaching. For it makes pure and
pleasant people. But the law is unclean, because it makes people
unclean, and is also defiled and weakened by those who do it.

**V.21. And I will take of them priests and Levites, saith the LORD.**

I will not only abolish the sacrifice, but the whole priesthood. For if
the Gentiles are to be made \"priests,\" then the Law of Moses, which
has born priests, and only priests born of one tribe, must perish
completely. Nowadays, all those who teach are priests. The \"Levites\"
are the listeners. But because he speaks of all Gentiles, he indicates
that all Gentiles have the right of the priesthood.

**V.22. For as the new heavens and the new earth, such as these, stand
before me, says the Lord, so shall your seed and name stand.**

The priesthood will be perpetual, just as the earth that I will create
on the last day will be perpetual.

**V.23. And all flesh shall come one month after another, and one
Sabbath after another, to worship before me, saith the LORD.**

I will also change the ceremonies and feasts of the Jewish priesthood.
There will be no difference of Sabbath in the church, but there will be
perpetual Sabbaths 2c. But these are in the spirit and in the faith. For
because of this skin of our flesh, certain days are necessary on which
to come together to perform the Word and the Sacraments.

**V. 24. And they will go out.**

By faith we go in to God and sacrifice. But we go out when we perform
the duties in the household and in the worldly regiment that happen in
the world.

**And look at the bodies of the people who maltreated me.**

This applies to the Jews, and to all others to this day, who mistreat
Christ. The spirit sees that these people are \"corpses\" because they
lack spirit and faith; moreover, no one sees or believes it, but they
are taken for the strongest bodies. \'

**For their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched;
and they shall be an abomination to all flesh.**

\(69\) \"Their worm,\" that is, the biting of the conscience, and the
power of sin, that they may feel sin, and fear everlasting damnation.
Thus the prophet concludes: \"Those who will not believe will be
destroyed. But the rest, the faithful, the Lord will save.

End.

To Christ, the true God, be praise and glory forever and ever! Amen.

[852 **Erl. 41, 186-188.** interpretation on Jer. 23, 5-8. **W. VI,
1366-1370.** 853]{.underline}

**B. An Epistle from the Prophet Jeremiah**

**\[Cap. 23, 5-8,\]**

of Christ\'s kingdom and Christian freedom. \*)

Preached in 1526; printed in 1527.

**Jeremiah on the 23rd chapter \[vv. 5-8.\].**

**Behold, the time cometh, saith the LORD, when I will establish a right
plant for David, and a king shall reign, that shall rule wisely, and do
justice and righteousness in the earth. In that day Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and he shall be called, O LORD our
righteous. Therefore, behold, the time cometh, saith the LORD, when it
shall no more be said: As the LORD liveth, which brought up the children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but as the LORD liveth, which
brought up the seed of the house of Israel out of the land of the north,
and out of all the countries whither I have driven them, and they shall
dwell in their own land.**

**Interpretation of the epistle.**

In this epistle or prophecy of Jeremiah, Christ is declared to us who he
is, and what his kingdom is, and how he shall reign, and how they that
are under his kingdom shall dwell safely. First, the prophet says that
Christ is the seed of David. St. Paul also says Rom. 1, 2. ff. that

God promised his gospel of his Son^a^ ) through the prophets in the
Scriptures, that he should be such a Lord, coming from the seed of David
according to the flesh, and yet be the Son of God, powerfully
demonstrated according to the Spirit who sanctifies. This is also such a
saying. And now the whole Old Testament serves this purpose, so that we
may see that all things which we now preach and believe have come to
pass just as they were proclaimed and prophesied before. Let us look at
this further.

You have heard that it was said to Abraham in Genesis 22:18: \"Through
your seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. This also is a
gospel, that the dear fathers might be comforted^b^ ) a very long time.
But it was not yet come to pass; for he saith, it shall come to pass
that all nations shall be blessed. In this saying it is certainly
promised to Abraham that this seed should come from his blood, so that
he should not gape to and fro, as in Adam\'s time, when they also held a
gospel that was quite

> a\) let prophesy b) helped

\*This sermon was preached by Luther in 1526, as we can conclude from
the words in ? 57: \"We should not do as the peasants did in the past
year. In 1527, it appeared in print under the title: \"Ein epistel aus
dem Propheten Jeremia, von Christus reich und Christlicher freyheit,
gepredigt durch Mar. Luther. Wittemberg 1. 5. 27.\" Under a similar
title, two other editions were published in the same year. The first
edition mentioned is in octavo, the other two in quarto. According to
what Dietz notes in his Wörterbuche zu Dr. Martin Luthers Schriften 8.
v. \"entsitzen\", that the phrase: \"entsitzen einem einen Zorn\" (which
is found in § 31 of our writing) does not occur in writings whose
publication Luther himself was responsible for, we have to assume that
this sermon was brought to print by others.\' Hence the rather
significant number of variants found in the original editions, but all
of them are such that they have no influence on the content. The
readings of the octavo edition are in the text in the Wittenberg edition
and in the Erlangen edition, while the variants of the text included in
the Jena edition, which Walch also included, are in the margins in the
Erlangen edition. In the collective editions, our writing is found: in
the Wittenberg (1556), vol. V, p. 301; in the Jena (1603), vol. Ill, p.
461b; in the Altenburg, vol. Ill, p. 795; in the Leipzig, vol. VII, p.
481 and in the Erlangen, vol. 41, p. 186. To us, the text of the Jena
seems to deserve preference, so we retain it from Walch\'s old edition.
What is enclosed in round brackets in the text and what is marked with
letters in the margin are the readings of the octavo edition of 1527.
What is enclosed in square brackets in the text is missing in the octavo
edition just mentioned.

854 **Erl. 41, 188-19\".** Interpretations on the Prophets. **W.** VI,
**1370-1373.** 855

darkly, namely, when God said to the serpent Genesis 3:15: \"I will put
enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed; he
shall bruise your head, and you shall bite him in the heel.\" All these
things that are spoken of Christ shall bruise the head of the devil, and
all nations shall be blessed through him.

3\. in these sayings (all) one finds (now) clearly that Christ must be
God and man, must die and rise again, and establish an eternal
kingdom^c^ ) here on earth, which happens only through his word. Even
though these words are not expressed in these proverbs, they certainly
are, and the words make it clear, if you look at the text and think
about it. But if one only looks at the words above, and does not pursue
them, then it seems as if there is nothing in them. As, in this saying,
\"By thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.\" They are
few and insignificant words, but if you look at them carefully, you will
find that Christ is God and man, and must die and rise again from the
dead. For if he is to bless and bless, that is, to take away the curse,
he must truly be over the curse; which curse is nothing else than death,
sin and all misfortune. If he is to do this, he must have the power and
authority^d^ to take away sin and death and to give life. From this it
follows that he is more than a bad man. For no one has power to do such
works except God alone, and he who does this work must be God.
(Further:) If he is to be Abraham\'s natural seed, he must ever be a
man. If he is a man, he must be truly mortal, otherwise he could not be
called Abraham\'s son. Again, if he is to bring blessing and benediction
upon all the nations of the earth, he must live forever and ever. So it
follows that he must be true natural God and man. ^e^) So you will find
it in all other sayings^f^ ) of the scripture, if one

c\) accept

d\) Violence

e\) is mortal and alive.

f\) Ends

they^g^ ) rightly and diligently looks at. Let us see from word to word
what Jeremiah reproaches us with in this saying, since we will also find
this. First, he speaks thus:

**V. 5. Behold, the time cometh, saith the LORD, when I will establish a
righteous plant for David.**

4 These words are certainly spoken by Christ, in which it is written
that the prophecy is that he will come from the blood and tribe of
David. From this line they had to wait for the Savior. Therefore St.
Paul speaks rightly \[Rom. 1, 3\] that he was born of the seed of David
according to the flesh, because the prophet Jeremiah wanted to make the
Savior almost sufficiently certain who he would be and from where he
would come, for the sake of those who would believe at the same time and
would believe afterwards, so that they would not be allowed to grope
back and forth and look elsewhere. Therefore he binds him to David\'s
bloodline and tribe, from which he is to be expected. By these words the
prophets almost comforted the people, telling them to look to this
lineage and believe that he would not come from anywhere but the tribe
of David.

5 The Jews knew this from the sayings of the Scriptures, and were as
certain of it as we know and believe that Christ will return on the last
day. Therefore the angel Gabriel said to Mary Luc. 1, 32. 33: \"God the
Lord will give him the throne of his father David, and he will be king
over Jacob forever, and his kingdom will have no end.

\(6\) So all the Scriptures are always pressing on David, as you also
hear here in the prophecy of Jeremiah: \"The time is coming, says the
Lord, when I will raise up a righteous plant for David. He says, \"I
will raise it up,\" that is, I will set it and make it stand firm. As if
he wanted to say: The Jewish people have patched and flapped themselves
with the kings until now; if I have raised up a pious king for them at
times, as Ezechiam, then they have had ten evil ones against it. I want
once a

g\) the sayings

856 **Erl. 41, 190-192.** interpretation on Jer. 23, 5-8. W. VI,
**I373-I37S.** 857

I will raise up and establish a king, and he shall remain. I will not
set him up to be challenged, but he will be challenged and touched by
the world, by the devil, and by all that is great and mighty in the
world. But I will set it up; it shall stand strong and sure; the enemies
shall not prevail against it.

007 And saith that he will raise up a righteous increase for David.
Zechariah also says that he will come righteously, Cap. 9, 9:
\"Behold,\" he says, \"your king is coming \[to you\], that he may be a
righteous man and a helper.\" ^h^) In this way the prophets regarded
Christ, as we also regard him, namely, 1) a king who makes the world
righteous. For the world is nothing else than a stable full of bad boys;
the world is the devil\'s kingdom, and blood and flesh are its servants.
All the saints have complained about the misfortune that is upon us, and
all the saints must also complain, as Paul shows in Rom. 7:18, 19. For
this reason, the dear fathers and prophets coveted and cried out without
ceasing for the righteous plant, for this Christ, who would make them
righteous and just, who would take away sin and death. All pious, good
hearts still desire this, yes, even the evil ones. For who would not
rather have life than death, and rather have righteousness than sin?
Therefore St. Paul cries out \[Rom. 7:24\], \"I wretched man, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?\" But not all men cry out in
this way, for not all feel it; the devil possesses many hearts and
deceives them so that they cannot remember it.

\(8\) This then is the sum and main saying of this epistle or prophecy,
that this king should be righteous and just, that is, without all sin,
by which he is set apart and excluded from all other men, who are all
unjust, wicked and sinners. Now if he is to be righteous, he must ever
not be born in the way that other human children are born. Therefore it
follows that his mother must be a virgin. For it is written of all other
men by the prophet

h\) Justifier and a Savior.

1\) In the original edition: \"one\"; in the Jena: \"for one\".

David Ps. 51, 7. thus said: \"Behold, I am made in iniquity, and my
mother conceived me in sins.\" Therefore, this king must be conceived
and born in another way, that is, without sin. For, if he is to be
righteous,^i^ ) and not guilty of death, he must not be born of a woman,
as we are, by the help of a man, but must have been conceived by the
Holy Spirit, and born of the holy pure virgin Mary. ^j^)

\(9\) But how is it that he is pure and not subject to death? Where does
this come from? He is said to come from David. Is David\'s lineage also
in the corruption? Right; but only one virgin from the tribe of David is
to be used for this. The other thing was done by the Holy Spirit, who
made this birth pure, as the angel said to Mary the Virgin, Luc. 1, 35:
\"The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High
will overshadow you; therefore also the holy one who is born will be
called the Son of God. Therefore we have such a king, who has a name
above all other kings, that he is righteous and just, so that he also
makes others blessed^k^ ) and just. And so these words imply that he
must be God and man, and born of a virgin; although these words do not
say it openly and clearly, yet they bring so much with them, where they
are basically seen.

010 But when he calls it a plant, he speaks according to the manner of
the Hebrew language, which calls children plants, as herbs, shrubs, and
trees grow. Now this does not sound so well in our ears as in the ears
of the Jews. So God also says of the Babylonian empire: \"I will cut off
the name of Babylon with its seed,^l^ ) its growth and its lineage. For
the children come from the parents, as the branches and twigs from the
trees. Therefore also Isaiah Cap. 11, 1. says: \"From the root^m^ )
Jesse

i\) have had another master, that he was conceived and born without sin.
For, if he was pious and of death 2c.

> j\) he must be pure from this birth, k) pious

l\) its remnants,

m\) the block

858 Srl. 41, 19L-IS5. Interpretations about the prophets. . W. VI.
1375-1378. 859

a little branch or twig will spring forth.\" From a trunk,^n^ ) which is
now dead, he says, a plant will grow, that is, from an old dead trunk,
because one does not think that something should grow out more and more.
For David had died, and his lineage lay even under and in ashes. Pilate
was at Jerusalem instead of David\'s kingdom, and the Romans were now in
charge, so that little more was known of David\'s lineage and tribe, and
it was hardly hidden in two or three persons than in Joseph and Mary,
who were at Nazareth. Now therefore, saith God, Let the tribe wax old
unto me, and wither, and I will raise it up: when ye think least that it
shall come, then it shall come: when they think that the tribe of David
is done, and is fallen, and shall not come to any thing, then will I
come, and will make it green, and it shall shoot forth, and bring forth
fruit.

\(11\) Then you see how the prophets agree with one another, and all go
to David, that from the tribe and lineage of David should come the pious
and righteous king \[and helper\], who saved his own from sins, death,
the devil, hell and from all misfortune, and made them blessed forever.
Jeremiah now goes on to say:

**And let a king reign who will rule wisely and establish justice and
righteousness on earth.**

\(12\) The words are always as if to show that there is no righteousness
on earth; not only do I speak of the righteousness that is valid before
God, but also of the worldly, external righteousness, which is nothing
but a beggar\'s cloak. For the world is a real school of the devil,
which is why God has set up and decreed the sword and worldly authority
(^o^ ), so that there may be a little of righteousness on earth, for
with the righteousness that applies before God, there is nothing. There
is only injustice on earth, also in the worldly government. In the
spiritual regime there is only blasphemy. For thus says the 14th Psalm,
v. 2. 3: \"The

n\) Block,

1\) Erlanger: deß.

o\) the executioner

The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if any
had understanding, and asked after God; but they were gone astray, and
were all together unfit. There was no one who did good, not even one.
Then he makes a short judgment and says that not even one is pious.
Well, that is certain, if you look at the world from heaven, you will
see nothing but blindness, wickedness, unrighteousness and foolishness,
and nothing but a stable full of bad boys, not much better than it was
in the time of Noah, when God wiped out all men by the flood of sin,
except the eighth. But such blindness and unrighteousness feel (you)
almost little, because only those who are taught and instructed by the
law, as at that time the pious hearts^p^ ) felt the burden of the law.
The common people go like cattle.

013 Now this child that shall be born of David, righteous and upright,
without sin, he shall be the king that shall stand and reign for ever.
If then he is the offspring and branch of David\'s tribe, he must ever
be mortal, for he is born in the flesh into the temporal life, and
therefore he must die. But because he shall stand forever and reign
forever, he must ever be immortal; how then will it be? So he must rise
again from the dead. This is what St. Peter wants, since he says in the
stories of the apostles from the prophet David that it was impossible
for him to be raised from death, Apost. 2, 24. Ps. 16, 10. What was the
cause? For he shall remain a king, and reign forever. So in these words
you see the resurrection of Christ indicated everywhere, that he had to
be born and die, and yet reign forever; therefore he had to rise from
the dead.

14 Furthermore, the prophet says that this king will rule wisely, that
is, he will rule with understanding and reason; as it says of David in 1
Sam. 18:5, \"He was wise in all his doings,\" that is, he was the most
prudent and the most judicious of all who were in Saul\'s court.
Jeremiah also says of this king, \"He will be prudent.

p\) the dear VLters and prophets. The common 2c.

860 **Erl. 41, 19S-IS7.** Interpretation on Jer. 23, 5-8. **W. VI.
I378-I38I.** 861

He will attack it wisely, that is. So far we have heard about the person
of the king, namely, that he should come from David\'s tribe, should be
a man, and be born of a pure virgin, and should be a righteous king;
which all goes to his person. Now it follows, that what the king has, he
shall not keep for himself, but shall invest it, and give it to men. And
this is what the prophet means here, \"he will rule wisely,\" that is,
he will rule with pure wisdom; as if to speak: He will leave all
weapons, armor, swords, guns, bows and spears; he will begin a special
way to make the people devout; not with the wheel or gallows, but with
or through the gospel; he will seize the people where they can be seized
best, namely, by the heart, and not by the neck, so that they will
willingly submit and gladly follow him. You see that he is a king for
this reason, that he helps the people, and does this without the stroke
of the sword, only through the gospel; for this reason he also rose from
the dead, and has his gospel preached through the Holy Spirit into all
the world.

15 After this the prophet says, \"that this king will establish justice
and righteousness on earth. These two words, \"justice and
righteousness,\" you read very often together in the Scriptures; as
Isaiah 9:7: \"Upon the throne of David and his kingdom, to establish and
strengthen it with judgment and righteousness from henceforth even for
ever\"; since he also speaks of the kingdom of Christ. So we Germans say
it: To judge rightly. The Jews pronounce it with two words, and yet mean
no more than that which we say: righteousness. But these two words are
meant by it: Forsake evil, and do good; for these are the two things
which belong to righteousness. And because there are no more than these
two things, the Scripture uses these two words, judicium and justitia.
By judgment or justice, God punishes, that is, He removes what is evil;
by righteousness, He makes people righteous, preserves and protects
innocence.

16Now, this king is not pious and righteous in himself alone, but he
\[also\] judges.

that which the world with its righteousness and works cannot accomplish,
namely, that people become devout. Who has ever heard of such a king?
^q^) He sits at the right hand of God, his heavenly Father, and is to
make people righteous and just; and this is to happen here on earth,
which is even more wonderful. But how does this work? So: Christ\'s
kingdom is a spiritual kingdom, it starts here on earth, and yet it is
not earthly, but heavenly. No king has ever been able to set up a
kingdom that is on earth and yet is not earthly but heavenly.

Therefore this work shows that this king must be more than a bad pure
man. For whoever can do the art and has the power to be over sin and to
justify sinners 1) must surely be God, for God alone justifies the
ungodly, as St. Paul says Rom. 4, 5. But because this king does and
accomplishes such things, it follows that he is true \[natural\] God,
since he has the honor and does the work that is due to God alone. If he
can then bring about that people are saved from sins, and thus make them
pious, he can also (immediately) save from death. For where there is no
sin, death has no power; for the sting of death is sin, as St. Paul says
in 1 Cor. 15:56; for if there were no sin, death would have neither
power nor authority. So this King delivers us from sin and death, from
the tyranny of the devil, from hell and from all misfortune, and gives
us eternal righteousness and eternal life, reconciles us to God the
Father,^s^ ) and gives us heaven and eternal bliss\]. This cannot be
done by any saint or angel, whoever and whatever he may be called;^t^ )
not even Mary, the Mother of God, but only by God. From this it follows
that this king must be God; and although it is not expressed in clear
words, the words and the

q\) Who has seen more of the same king?

1\) The Jena one alone has the reading: \"sinners\", in all other
editions: Sin.

r\) death is also gone.

s\) makes GOtt a father to us,

t\) now no man, neither angels nor saints do,

862 **Erl. 41, 197-200.** Interpretations On the Prophets\.... **W. VI,
1381-1383.** 863

the understanding of this saying that he is true (natural) God and man.
The prophets have spoken so finely of Christ, depicted him so
gloriously^u^ , that it is to be wondered at, so that we may never lack
him.

\(18\) Now here is a question. You have now said that all \[men, even
the\] saints \[are sinners, and\] must cry out with St. Paul over sin,
and over death (and lament), \"I wretched man, who will deliver me from
the body of this death?\" (Rom. 7:24.) So also we see that Christians
die; yea, the greater Christians, the more grievous death they suffer.
What is this to me? Does it mean to save from death and sin? That is
what I said: It is a spiritual kingdom, and a kingdom of faith, it wants
to stand in faith; and one must also look at it with the eyes of faith,
otherwise no one will ever understand it. For that remains (all there),
that death devours us. The emperors (kings) and tyrants cut off the
heads of the apostles and holy martyrs, St. Paul had to take the head.
So also the lusts and affections remain sins; also there are many
rotteries and sects, which all rebel against the Christians. Where is
life? Where is the victory and the conquest of death that is preached in
this kingdom?

\(19\) To this I answer thus: We have dominion and power over sin and
over death; but we have not yet overcome it, nor are we yet rid of it.
For the text says that the king is still in the work, for he still
always establishes godliness, still makes pious and righteous. Just as a
tailor who makes a skirt, while he is making the skirt, so he is in the
work, and it must not be said that the skirt is made wholly true. So
Christ\'s kingdom on earth is still at work, he is still making and
judging it daily, and it will last until the last day, when it will be
truly perfect. However, Christians still fall into sin, though
unwillingly. But a Christian has the advantage that even though he feels
sin, he is still its master. But there he brings it

u\) and us the so pretty

not to be rid of sin everywhere, until the old rascal dies and perishes.

020 Therefore, when Christians fall, Christ is there, ruling by his
Spirit, overcoming sin, and always raising it up again, saying, Arise,
brother, be of good cheer; there is no need. So Christ is always in the
battle and in the work, fighting \[without ceasing\] with the enemies:
they lay themselves against him, but at last he wins, and they must be
defeated. So it is also with His own, in whom God triumphs and conquers
through Christ. Therefore St. Paul says in 1 Cor. 15, 57: \"But thanks
be to God, who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ\";
and in 2 Cor. 2, 14 he says: \"Thanks be to God, who always helps us to
keep the field in Christ.\" Although one of the lines has fallen, Christ
is there and raises him up again, saying, \"Up, brother, up, there is no
need; keep at it, it must have passed through, it cannot happen without
falling; only see that you do not remain lying down. It is a matter of
falling down and getting up again, because we live here.

021 Therefore, as Christ overcame sin, so he overcomes death. If death
is there, and holds fast, and wants to strangle you, then Christ is
there, and says: Fresh on, he cannot harm you, and even if he strangles
you, it will not happen to you differently, as if you went to sleep;
only boldly through, it is about a little to do, about a short hour it
will get better. You can feel that death is bitter and harsh, but it
cannot prevail or triumph over you. For Christ has weakened it, its
sting or spear has become too blunt, it has run to Christ, who has
overcome it and trodden under its feet.

\(22\) So it is with the rotteries and sects, or heresies, and with all
other calamities. None of these things can harm us, for we have one in
heaven who is powerful over all these things, and can keep watch over us
so that nothing happens to us without his will. Therefore I say that the
outward temptations remain, but our faith still remains intact; for
there still remains in our heart a power against the

864 **Erl.** 41, **200-202.** interpretation on Jer. 23, 5-8. W. VI,
**1383-1386.** 865

Sin, and courage against death and all calamities. This means that
Christ remains in his office and carries on his work, bluing himself
with sins and struggling with death until his kingdom is accomplished,
that is, until the last day.

\(23\) Now we have heard how the prophet Jeremiah proclaimed Christ,
what his person is, and what his office is to be, namely, that his
office is to rule wisely and to reign wisely, and so to establish
godliness and righteousness on earth. And this office or government is
described in such words, from which it seems clear that his kingdom is
not visible and physical, but must be an invisible and spiritual
kingdom; but that it is here on earth, that is, among the people who
live here. Therefore it follows that it is a kingdom of faith and cannot
be grasped with physical eyes. You have now heard enough of this. Now
continue in the prophet:

V. 6: **In those days Judah shall be helped, and Israel shall dwell
safely.**

024 That is, in the same time of the seed of David, when this king shall
reign, Judah shall be righteously helped, there shall be a round and
speedy help, as we say in German, In that day or that day will I help
thee out of all trouble; so that this shall be a help and salvation from
all calamity and from all peril.

025 These two sayings also show that this kingdom is not a fleshly
kingdom. For ye know that the kingdom of Judah was divided into two
kingdoms, the kingdom of Judah, and the kingdom of Israel: The ten
families had their own king, which was called the kingdom of Israel.
After this was the small kingdom of Judah and Benjamin, which was called
the kingdom of Judah. For the people were divided, and had every one his
own king. Now God rejected the great kingdom because of sin and
idolatry, and made it desolate and destroyed it, so that he never raised
it up again, but let it remain scattered among the nations, among the
Medes and the Affyrians. Therefore he never sent them any prophets, nor
did he raise up any among them.

So this kingdom has come to an end in the flesh, and has never come
again.

026 The other kingdom also, Judah, he made desolate for their sin, and
carried them captive into Babylon: but unto this kingdom he had mercy,
that he destroyed it not altogether: he forsook them not altogether, but
suffered the poor common man and the husbandmen to remain in the land,
that they might build it: but the mighty and the rich, the great men, he
carried away out of the land, with their goods and chattels, as the Turk
doeth. God did this so that the seed might remain in Judah, and gave
them prophets at all times to comfort them and tell them that God would
keep His promise; He also performed miraculous signs among them.
Likewise he also preserved the royal tribe: though Jechonias the king
was captive, yet he remained king; so that the king of Babylon raised
him up again, and set him at his table. For the saying stood firm, that
David\'s tribe, line and royal family^v^ ) should remain, out of which
the Messiah should come. This also remained, although it was different,
and everyone despaired of it.

27 Thus God has always upheld the lineage of Judah, according to the
glorious divine promises in all the prophets,^w^ , that it should remain
until Christ. Therefore one could still say: David\'s family is still
alive. Moreover,^x^ ) after seventy years, he again rescued Judah from
prison and brought it back into the land of Judah. For because of this
promise that Christ should come from David\'s lineage, God did not allow
it to be said: Judah would be as shattered and destroyed as Israel.

28 Since Judah and Israel have come apart and will never come together
to become one kingdom again, how does the prophet say here, \"Judah
shall be helped, and Israel shall dwell safely\"? thus binds Judah and
Israel together, and the text reads as if it should become one kingdom
and one people. That is

v\) Blood

w\) for they hold strong promises in their hands, that it 2c.

x\) Therefore

866 **Erl. 41, sos-LV4.** Interpretations about the prophets. **W. VI.
I386-IS8S.** 867

Not to be understood bodily, that Judah and Israel should again both
come together bodily in the land, but this happened under Christ,
spiritually, in faith, as he is preached through the gospel. For when
Christ was preached in Jerusalem, many Jews were converted and believed
in Christ, both of the tribe of Judah and of Israel. For on the day of
Pentecost \[Acts 2:41\] there were at Jerusalem of Assyria, Cilicia,
Persia, Media, and of all countries, among whom out of one day three
thousand were converted, and believed on Christ, the seed of David.
Therefore this text cannot be understood of the physical kingdom, but of
Christ\'s spiritual kingdom. For Judah and Israel to come together again
and become one kingdom could not have happened under any physical king.
Therefore, when the prophets put these two nations, Judah and Israel,
together, they want to indicate Christ\'s kingdom at all times. So also
here the prophet Jeremiah says, \"that Judah shall be saved, and Israel
shall dwell safely,\" which happened under Christ. For otherwise \[as
said,\] they did not come together, nor will they ever come together
again.

029 Why then saith he even now, Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall
dwell safely? Therefore, as if he wanted to speak: Because these
kingdoms are established, they will be challenged, and in the end they
will be destroyed, and the royal family will be taken away; but they
will have help. Woe is now unto Judah, they are carried away into a
strange land, and there they must be subject unto others, and serve; but
I will set up a help in time to come, that my people may be always on
high, and that all the world may be mad and foolish over it. But the
Jews did not understand this.

\(30\) This shows that Christ\'s kingdom is subject to the holy cross.
For this is never lacking, where Christ\'s kingdom is planted through
the gospel^y^ ), the cross and persecution certainly follow from the
beginning. This is shown by the similitude in Luc. 11, 21. 22. where the
Lord Christ says: \"If a strong man keeps his house, he will not be able
to keep his house.

y\) preached

But if a stronger man comes upon him and overcomes him, he takes away
his armor, on which he relied, and divides the plunder. How does this
work? So, if the gospel does not go, the devil is in the world and
reigns mightily with good peace and quiet, and all men go to hell
asleep; as we have seen so far under the papacy; there was an outward
peace, but a dangerous and corrupt peace. ^z^) But in the gospel true
peace is preached, under which there is vain strife, for the sake of
tyrants and sects. Therefore, because the gospel now arises that attacks
the devil\'s kingdom and shows^a^ ) what a fellow the devil is, how
black he is, and that his kingdom, however holy and pious it always
seems, only leads to hell and damnation, all the world sets itself
against it, what is great and holy, attaches itself to it, and hurts the
devil that he and his kingdom are put to shame. Therefore he hastens on
it all he can muster, saying, \"I am asleep, and have been sitting in
good peace for a long time, but you want to destroy my sleep: wait, I
will again break your sleep, and will make enough trouble for you. If
you have a desire for strife, you shall have your fill of it. He does
this very well, as we see; for as soon as we accept the gospel, we have
peace, and at the same time we have strife. It preaches peace, and yet
is \[outwardly seen\] the highest strife there.

Where Christ reigns through his gospel and word, there shall be help.
This is what he preaches and proclaims to us. The devil may raise up
tyrants and sects, and cause the whole world to oppose the gospel; but
let them rage and rage, and they shall not prevail against it, of that
be sure. For the Scriptures are full of these sayings and promises: as
the 33rd Psalm, v. 10, says: \"The Lord brings to nought the counsel of
the heathen, and hinders the thoughts of the nations.\" And Psalm 2, 1-
says David, that the heathen rage, and the people speak, and the kings
of the land rebel.

z\) but it was not a righteous peace.

a\) that is subject to touch and denounce the devil\'s kingdom,

868 **Erl. 41, LV4-2V7.** Interpretation On Jer. 23, 5-8. **W. VI,
I389-I3SI.** 869

and the councilors argue with each other against the Lord and his
anointed, but he adds a word that means \"in vain\" and says: \"He who
dwells in heaven will laugh at her, and the Lord will mock her. Why?
Because he is too strong and mighty for them; he can certainly show them
anger, even if there were a thousand times as many of them, they will
certainly not win anything against him. But this requires a strong faith
and a sharp face that can recognize such things.

32 Therefore these are good words, that the prophet saith, Judah shall
be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely. If you do not look at them with
faith, you will surely find the contradiction. For is it help, or is it
peace, when Christ the King himself is hanged on the cross? when the
heads of the apostles are cut off, and the Christians are driven from
house and home, and chased from one city to another? Item, when Christ,
as he himself says, Matth. 10, 16, sends the apostles and preachers like
sheep among wolves? There should truly be a fine peace. Shakers and
spears or dogs should be sent among them. I also think that this is
called a kingdom of peace, in which help is given; it might well be
called a kingdom of strife, in which there is nothing but strangling and
killing. Yes, that is what I said, it is a different kingdom than the
one you see before your eyes. Outwardly it seems as if it were
condemned, as if it were forsaken, as if it were delivered up, but
inwardly there is peace and help; there one gets the victory by faith.
In the eyes of the world it seems as if the Christians are doomed, for
they are killed and strangled like slaughtered cattle, and the wicked
float above, the mobs and sects are right and triumphant. But what is
it? It will not be long before everything will be turned around; the
wicked will perish, and the teachings of the spirits of the wicked will
be forgotten. Then it will be seen how Christ helped his own, and how
they were masters of death, sin and the devil, which now seems nothing.

33 Thus it was in Arii\'s time: there were scarcely three bishops in all
Christendom who preached rightly; the whole world was seduced with this
heresy, even the emperor.

itself. There was a great persecution of the Christians because of this
heresy, so that many of them were driven out of the cities and countries
everywhere, so much so that one does not read of a greater persecution
than that which was in Arius\' time. It seemed as if Christ was at the
bottom and Arius was at the top; people thought, now it is over with
Christ and his Christians, the gospel is gone, it is over with them.
Yes, it is over; nevertheless Christ and the faith remained. Where are
the same heretics now? Arius and the emperor perished, so that their
name now also stinks before the world, and their teaching is no longer
valid; they have all gone to the devil. But Christ is still alive, and
his kingdom is still established.

034 So to this day, when it is said, There are many sects, and there are
many rebellions against the gospel, and it is to be feared that the
gospel shall perish. Rather, let them go, they will not leap over the
saying to me, \"Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely.\"
The saying must remain true,^b^ ) be it as it may. Satan and the world
want to hinder it, want to take away the faith; but he says: I will let
them run, nevertheless I will help them, and they shall dwell safely
with me; in spite of him who forbids me. Although there is no security
(for what security is there under the cross?), and the world is still
seeking life, and Satan wants to take away faith, yet they shall dwell
safely with me. And this will certainly happen. For where the gospel is,
there is such a wall, fiery and iron, and thicker than heaven and earth,
and a thousand emperors may not overthrow this wall of a Christian. For
the word of God endures forever. Therefore Christians have happy
consciences, and the more the world rages, the bolder and more defiant
they become, the more certain this certainty and defiance stands. Thus
the tyranny of the world and the sects strengthen the hearts of
Christians.

35 Therefore this text compels one to speak of a spiritual kingdom. For
there is no kingdom so mighty, which can only serve its under-

b\) be,

870 **Eri. 41, 207-209.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. vi,
1391-1394.** 871

thanen with \[physical power or\] the sword could have provided such
security and peace. The Romans have been the most powerful lords, yet
they have often been slain, and have never been able to bring about
peace and security; now four thousand, now ten thousand, 2c. have been
slain of them, and thus have always had strife and offence. Now continue
in the prophet:

**And he shall be called, O Lord, our righteous.**

\(36\) He described the person, the ministry, and the fruit of the
ministry, that he would establish justice and righteousness, and that
the people would have salvation and dwell safely under the cross and
persecution. Now the prophet says what his name shall be called, saying,
\"He shall be called, O Lord, our Righteous One.\" The Jews think much
of the name in the Hebrew language, as we have rendered \"HErr,\" and
say, \"He cannot be called; neither do they call him. So they hold it in
great honor, they do not write it on any paper; and when they write it
on it, they change the letters, and make scarcely two letters, neither
do they allow the Christians to see it written. Some wicked men among
the Jews have also deceived many princes and lords with this name, to
whom they have given it written, saying, Whoever carries it with him
cannot be shot, and serves for other such things. Just as many
Christians, who learned it from the Jews, use to wear this name,
engraved in gold or silver, on their necks, so that they will not be
shot or wounded 2c.

\(37\) That the Jews think so highly of this name, and honor it so
highly, is due to this: for where the name \"Lord\" is found in
Scripture, it signifies God in His divine nature and majesty, and is
said of the true God. The Hebrew language has almost ten names to call
God, among which there are many, to call God by His works. But this name
\"Jehovah\", \"Lord\", means only God as He is in His divine essence. We
cannot make this distinction in our language.

We Germans call it all Lord, and cannot force the word \"Lord\" to be
called God alone; for we call a prince Lord, a householder is also
called a Lord; it is almost common to us Germans. But that we also call
God a \"Lord\", we get from the evangelists, who call him Dominum,
\"Lord\"; we follow them, and let it stay that way. The other names in
Hebrew are not only attributed to God, but are also said to (other)
people; but this name \"Jehovah\", \"HErr\", belongs only to the true
God.

38 Since the holy Scriptures and the Jews themselves, as well as the
holy fathers and all writers, agree that this name alone and actually
belongs to the divine majesty and essence, we have here in the prophet
Jeremiah a mighty, strong push against the Jews, and even an excellent,
great comfort for us Christians; for there this article of our faith is
quite powerfully established, that Christ is true, natural God. I have
spoken of this myself to the Jews, even to the most learned, who knew
the Bible so well that there was not a letter in it; they understood it,
and have held this saying against me; but they could raise nothing
against me. At last they gave this answer, saying: They believed their
Talmud, that is, their interpretation, which said nothing of Christ; and
the same interpretation they must follow. That is why they do not stay
with the text and seek excuses, because if they stayed with this text
alone, they would be overcome. For this saying concludes too strongly
that this seed of David is a true and natural God; for he is to be
called by name, that the true, right God may be called.

\(39\) In the other book of Moses, Cap. 22, 28, the judges are called
\"Elohim\", gods, because of their office, because they sit in God\'s
place and are God\'s servants. Likewise, all Christians are also called
gods, as Christ draws from the 82nd Psalm, v. 6, Joh. 10, 34. when he
said to the Jews: \"Is it not written in your law? I said you are
gods?\" But this word, \"Jehovah,\" you will nowhere find to any other
than to the divine majesty alone. The other names, there-

872 **Erl. 41, 20S-L11.** Interpretation on Jer. 23, 5-8. **W. VI,
1394-1397.** 873

with which God is also called in the Hebrew language, as the Jews
themselves say, have cause from some work that God does. As, Pachad is
called, from the fear that one fears him. Thus Jacob swore by his
father\'s fear \[Gen. 31:54\]. God is also called Shadhai, because he
feeds and cares for all things, and all the other names. So that every
name brings with it a work that it does, from which it is thus called;
as we also say, and call it a God of truth, because it is true, yes, it
is truth itself, and makes true, righteous people. Item, a faithful God,
that he is faithful and keeps what he promises. Item, a God of peace, a
God of patience, a God of comfort, as St. Paul often calls him from his
work, according to the occasion of the thing of which he speaks. But
this name, since he is called Jehovah (the Jews speak themselves), no
cause nor arrival is indicated, nor is any work expressed, whereof he is
thus called, but only that he understands the mere Godhead and divine
majesty. And therefore, when the Jews read this text here, they do not
read Jehovah, but Adonai. So we Christians can confidently conclude from
this saying of Jeremiah that Christ should be recognized as a true and
natural God.

Therefore, let us remember this text, so that when the heretics and
sects rise up and challenge this article of our faith, that Christ is
not a true and natural God (as this heresy will surely come), we will be
prepared to hold this saying up to their noses, so that they will not be
able to easily oppose it. With such certain, strong sayings they must be
seen, otherwise they will slip away from us and pass through, like fish
wiping through a net. It is a slippery thing around the heretics, one
can hold them with difficulty, and are frivolous to act in divine
writing. All this makes them carry their conceit into the Scriptures,
and the Scriptures must be guided, bent, and directed according to their
head and mind.

41 Therefore, we should hear God\'s word with fear and act with humility
in it.

thine, and not plump with our conceit. You would rather fall into all
sin than into your own conceit, such a dangerous, harmful thing it is.
For the word of God is not to be trifled with. If you cannot understand
it, take your hat off to it. It suffers no reproach, nor any human
interpretation, but it is in earnest, and wants to be honored and
restrained. Therefore beware lest you fall with your conceit. For if you
fall in with your arrogance, you will stoop down, like our gang spirits,
and will not know whether you are in the back or in the front, and it
will be difficult to advise you. For if one falls into his conceit, he
cannot easily be helped out again. So it also happened to the Jews; they
could not hear it, and still cannot hear it today, that Christ is to be
a natural, true God. For they are hardened and captives of the devil,
who keeps them in his power; with hearing they do not hear, and with
seeing they do not see, as Isaiah Cap. 6, 10. prophesied about them.
This is what happened to all heretics: when the truth was presented to
them so clearly that they could grasp it, they still did not see it or
want to understand it.

\(42\) So do all the sects and all the spiritual groups, as many as they
are; they will not be persuaded, even if it were clearly written in the
Scriptures. Is this not the devil, that one does not hear nor see that
which is before his eyes? But this is what the 109th Psalm, v. 18, says:
\"It has passed like oil through their marrow and bones, and like water
into their inward parts.\" If thou hast drunk water, and it is turned
into flesh and blood unto thee, thou canst, bring it forth. So also with
oil, if it has flowed in at all, it cannot easily be brought out. It is
the same with heresy, with our own good faith; if this pestilence is
ingrained, the devil will tear it out, but I will not. That is why St.
Paul speaks to Tito Cap. 3, 10: \"Avoid an apostate man, when he has
been admonished once and again, and know that such a one is perverse and
sins as he who has condemned himself.\" Therefore

[874 **Erl. 41, 211-214.** interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1397-1899. 875]{.underline}

so beware of the cults. It is easy to get in, but difficult to get out.
Believe me, you cannot get out as easily as you can get in. I have said
all this for the sake of the Jews, who do not want to be persuaded by
this public text that Christ is the natural and true God.

43\) It cannot be said that God gives him this name as man, as it is
written in the first book of Moses, Cap. 1, 26: \"Let us make man in our
image, in our likeness\"; but that man is called a true, natural God,
this does not happen. For God speaks in Isaiah Cap. 42, 8: \"My glory I
will give to no other.\" But this name he truly gives to this man
Christ, the seed or offspring of David, of whom he said before, because
he is also a natural God. And so one Lord speaks of the other Lord, that
is, the true, natural God of another true, natural God (for the prophet
speaks here of their two), and says: \"I Lord and true God will raise up
a plant for David, who shall also be called Lord and true God. Now a
faith belongs to it, which grasps such things. As I have said \[§ 40\],
there is still heresy against this article of our faith, that Christ is
the true and natural God. God grant that we do not experience it.

44 Furthermore, the prophet says that this seed of David will also be
called \"our righteous one\" or \"righteousness. The first name, that he
is called \"Lord,\" refers to his divine person, in which he neither
gives nor communicates anything to us. But the other name, that he is
called our Righteous One, refers to his office, that he may serve us,
for in this name is comprehended his whole office, and the fruit or
benefit of this King. We have such a king, who is truly GOD, and not
only truly GOD, but he concerns us, because he is our righteous one.
This is our greatest comfort, that this King and Lord is ours. He has
become ours, having taken on our flesh and blood,^c^ ) so that

c\) by the humanity he has attracted, so that 2c.

He will take care of us as his flesh. Such names should be written with
golden letters, yes, not only with golden letters, but with drops of
blood in the bottom of the heart.

Here you see that this King, Christ, is not only God, but also \"our
righteous one,\" or \"our righteousness,\" who makes us pious and
righteous. As St. Paul also interprets it in many ways, and especially 1
Cor. 1, 30, where he says: \"Christ was made for us by God for wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.\"

\(46\) I have often said that a Christian life consists of these two
things. First, that our sins which we have committed are wholly forgiven
and forgiven us through Christ, if we believe in him. Next, that not
only are our sins forgiven us, and there is righteousness, but there is
also sanctification from the rest of our sins, so that the rest of our
sins do not harm me. For Christ is the truest righteousness of all, and
is altogether righteous and clean, and cleanseth me also from the sins
that are yet in my flesh: for this righteousness of Christ is mine, and
is imputed unto me, that I am without sin; not because of me, but
because of the righteousness of Christ. If then I believe in Christ,
Christ shall stand with his righteousness before the face of God in
heaven and answer for me. Therefore we should and must accept his
righteousness as if it were our own, and we should look forward to it as
to our \[eternal\] inheritance. For these words here, that he is called
\"our righteous one,\" are not a joke.

\(47\) Now behold the riches of a Christian who can never die, for he
has Christ himself. What then will death or sin do to a Christian in
mortal peril? Nothing; death becomes laughter before him. Nor does he
ask about sin. For neither sin nor death, neither devil nor hell, can
bring anything against Christ, whom \[every\] Christian has with him.

\(48\) Now when death comes to a believing Christian, the Christian
says: Bene veneritis, 1) dear death, what good do you bring?

1\) That is: Be welcome.

876 **Erl. 41. 214-216.** Interpretation On Jer. 23, 5-8. **W. VI,
1399-1402.** 877

What are you looking for here? Do you not know whom I have with me?
Christ is my righteousness; dear one, go and take it from me. If thou
takest it from me, I will follow thee; but thou wilt not. So Christians
defy death, and say with St. Paul 1 Cor. 15:55: \"Death, where is thy
sting? Hell, where is thy victory?\" and as he says Phil. 1, 21.
\"Christ is my life, and dying is my gain.\" If I die, I gain; for I
come to life the sooner. There you see what death does to Christians. It
is only their gain, they lose nothing in it; but it bites them to death.

\(49\) In the same way, the sin that is left and still clings to us
cannot harm us or condemn us, for Christ is with us, sweeping and
cleansing us so that from day to day we become more and more holy and
more and more hostile to sin, desiring to die and seeking blessedness
and eternal life. This then is called our sanctification. Therefore,
because Christ\'s righteousness is ours, do not celebrate it, but sweep
and cleanse us as long as we live here, until we also become pure and
holy, as Christ is holy. But all this comes from him.

\(50\) Thus the prophet signified the ministry of Christ in these words,
that he is our king, our bishop or priest, and our righteousness, and
also our deliverer from sins, death, the devil, and hell, and that he
delivers us out of all troubles, and is our life, salvation, and
blessedness. Therefore, if I have him by faith, the whole world cannot
bring anything against me, nor do me any harm. For he is too great, and
sitteth at the right hand of God, there shall he abide in the sight of
all: in spite of him that casteth him down unto me. He holds fast; let
us hold fast to him and to his righteousness, and there will be no need.
Now continue in Jeremiah:

**V. 7. 8. Therefore, behold, the time cometh, saith the LORD, when it
shall no more be said: As the Lord liveth, which brought up the children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but as the Lord liveth, which
brought up the seed of the house of Israel out of the land of Egypt.**

**Land of the Midnight, and from all the lands whither I have driven
them, and they shall dwell in their land.**

The prophet does not want to forget anything, but wants to teach
completely and thoroughly righteous what is to be preached in the New
Testament, and thus wants to say: It would not be enough if one preached
this immediately as you have heard, because one would still find some
weak consciences who still wanted to cling to the Old Testament and
believe the same. Here the prophet preempts them, speaks of Christian
freedom, and abolishes the Old Testament altogether, because he wants to
teach a new one. So the new cannot be taught unless the old is
abolished, as it is written in Heb. 8:13. As if the prophet wanted to
say: A new preaching will arise, Moses, and the old testament will no
longer apply in the new testament, but will cease and be done away with.
This is what the prophet wants in this last saying.

52 This then is the doctrine which we practice,^d^ ) and which we
received from St. Paul, namely, that no law or commandment should be
external to Christians. For thus he says Gal. 2, 19: \"I died to the law
through the law\"; that is, through the new law in the New Testament I
died to the old law in the Old Testament. Moses is no longer valid for
me, since I have Christ. The Old Testament held that the Jews had to
keep the laws that God gave to Moses on Mount Sinai, namely, how they
should keep the holidays or feasts, how they should dwell in such and
such a land, how they should keep themselves with food and clothing, and
what the laws and commandments were more, so that all their things were
fixed and bound to person, time, place and gift, so that they had a
fixed regiment, just as other kingdoms have their orders and laws, as
the Saxons have the Saxon seal, according to which they judge and keep.
But such compulsion as the Jews had, the Christians shall not have, for
they shall not be bound by any law, so that they must do something
compelled and urged, and by

\(d\) teach.

878 **Erl. 41, 21S-S18.** Interpretations on the Prophets. **W. VI.
I402-I4VS.** 879

The people are not bound by time, person, place, or gift, as the Jews
are; but they are to be a free and unbound people, willing to do
anything with pleasure and love; therefore the 110th Psalm, v. 3, says:
\"Your people will be willing.\"

053 Now what is the cause that Christians should not be bound by the
law? This is the cause: For this King has come to establish
righteousness on earth, that is, to make people righteous. Now if he
wants to make people righteous, what is the law for? If the people were
righteous and pious, they should not be made righteous or pious. \"He
who is well has no need of a physician,\" says Christ in the Gospel
\[Matt. 9:12\].

54 Since the prophet said before that this king is a just and righteous
king, not only for himself but also to make others righteous and just,
we who are in his kingdom are not bound by any law, nor may we become
righteous by it. For if the world were righteous, we should have no
emperor, nor prince, nor mayor, nor judge, nor executioner, nor wheel,
nor gallows, nor fire, nor water, nor sword, nor spear; for every man
would willingly do of himself what he ought to do, as one eateth and
drinketh willingly and without compunction. But because it is a stable
full of bad boys, it is necessary to have laws and authorities, judges,
executioners, swords, gallows, and all the rest, so that the bad boys
can be resisted. For as St. Paul says in 1 Tim. 1:9: \"No law is given
to the righteous, but to the unrighteous and disobedient, to the wicked
and sinners, to the unholy and unclean, to murderers of fathers and
murderers of mothers, to the slayers, and to the covetous.\" But in
Christianity they are pious and just, each one does what he should do,
willingly and gladly; there is no power or dominion of one over the
other; but there are brothers of one mind, and one serves the other,
helps him, counsels him, and takes care of his neighbor as of his
brother, yes, as of himself, let alone that one should offend the other;
there neither judge nor executioner, neither sword nor gallows,
everything is done brotherly. For even Christ is not ashamed to call us
his brothers.

when after his resurrection he said to Mary Magdalene Joh. 20, 17: \"Go
to my brothers and tell them: I ascend to my Father and to your Father,
to my God and to your God.\"

55 Therefore the prophet says here that at the time when this righteous
and pious king reigns, the law of Moses will no longer apply. Which he
expresses in these words, saying, \"They shall say no more, As the LORD
liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt.\" For this was the oath or swearing among the Jews, that they
said, By the living GOD, who brought us out of Egypt. This is also the
way of swearing to the Scriptures, as we see from time to time in the
prophets, so that they want to make people certain and sure that they
teach and preach under God\'s name and in His command. As if they wanted
to say: \"This is the truth and the word of God, by the living God; or,
as God the Lord lives. In the same way, all preachers should be sure
that they can say: God speaks it, it is God\'s word; and when I preach
the word of God, it is as much as I swear. He who is not sure of this,
and cannot say, \"God speaks,\" may well leave off preaching, for he
will not do any good.

\(56\) This is the opinion of the prophet: The Old Testament will no
longer be preached nor taught to bind, but only for the purpose of
taking examples of faith from it, so that we may know how God keeps His
promises. But now they will preach about him who abolished the Old
Testament, and that no one becomes righteous or saved through laws, as
the Jews did, but Christ alone is the one who makes righteous and just
through his righteousness. And this sermon will not be preached in Judah
alone, or in one or two countries, but throughout the whole world. Summa
Summarum, the old testament will no longer be preached, but only the
new, so that this righteousness will be spread as far as the whole
world.

\(57\) These are our letters and seals, that we are a free people,
without law and without restraint, but for Christians alone, who know
well the need of Christian liberty. We

**880 Erl. 4i, 818-221.** exegesis on Jer. 23, 5-8. **W. vi, 1405-1408.
881**

should not do as the peasants did in the past year. But where are such
Christians who need Christian freedom, who do everything willingly and
gladly, who thus serve their neighbor and give goods to another, and do
as God has done and befallen them? Where are they who gladly suffer the
cross? It is a strange bird a Christian. There are few of them who know
what Christian freedom is. Most of the people put it on the body, and do
not know that it is a freedom of the conscience and in the soul, namely,
that you are not pure in heart and conscience, nor righteous, but if you
want to become pure and righteous, you must realize that you become
pure, righteous and blessed through this King, Christ Jesus alone, by
means of his blood, which he shed for you on the cross, and that makes
you free, but the law of Moses, of Caesar, and other things more, do not
make you free.

58\. When I preach, I do not mean that one should not be obedient to the
authorities, serve them and give them what is due to them; for Christian
freedom does not concern the body and the outward being, but the soul.
Therefore, if you serve the authorities and are obedient, it is as much
as if you gave a coat to a naked man or fed a hungry man, for it is also
a work of love that flows from faith; not that you want to become godly
through the work, but that it proves your faith. So this is the sum:
Before God you shall be righteous without works, without all laws,
through Christ alone.

\(59\) Then you see how masterfully and powerfully the prophets were
able to portray Christ and His kingdom, so that they might ever make us
certain and certain of our salvation. May God grant that we may thus
understand and believe \[Amen\]. Praise to God.

**C. D. Martin Luther\'s translation of the 38th and 39th chapters of
the prophet Ezekiel from Gog,**

together with preface and marginal notes.\*)

Translated end of April 1530; issued beginning of June 1530.

The 38th and 39th chapters of Ezekiel vom Gog, translated 1530.

**Martin Luther\'s Preface to the 38th and 39th Chapters of Ezekiel, by
Gog.**

1\. because in the Revelation of St. John, chapter 20, v. 8, the Gog is
described as fighting against Christianity with a great army, like sand
on the sea, innumerable, and finally to be destroyed with fire from
heaven, whom we consider to be the Turk,

Because I am sitting here so idle, I have undertaken to translate the
two chapters of Ezekiel, namely the 38th and 39th, which are almost the
same as the Revelation; and see that St. John has taken it from Ezekiel,
and directs us here in the pro-

\*) The Jena edition adds to the date: Anno 1530 the closer
determination: Nenss \^prili, which in any case comes very close to the
truth. For after Luther was brought to the fortress of Coburg on April
23, he immediately took up the work and wrote the translation of these
two chapters of Ezekiel after the \"Admonition to the clergy, assembled
at the Imperial Diet in Augsburg\". Already on May 12, he wrote about it
to Melanchthon (De Wette, IV, p. 15): \"I have long since finished my
exhortation to the clergy and sent it to Wittenberg. I have also
translated the two chapters of Ezekiel from the Gog and provided them
with a preface, which will appear in print at the same time (with the
admonition!).\" The admonition came out at the beginning of June, for on
June 11 the Elector sent copies of it to Dolzig (De Wette, vol. IV, p.
11); to this time, therefore, we also have the

882 **Erl.** 41, SS1-2S3. Interpretations on the Prophets. **W. VI,
1408-1410.** 883

phets Ezekiel, who speaks a little further about it. Otherwise one finds
nowhere in the holy scripture of the name Gog.

\(2\) And it seems to me that the Holy Spirit shortens the name of the
Turk, and does not call him badly \"Magog\", which is the right whole
name, Gen. 10:2, but breaks off his head, takes away the first letter,
and calls him \"Gog\"; although both Gog and Magog are one name, in this
place and in Revelation, and also both mean the same Turk. He does this
to show us comfort that he is almost an enemy of Gog. Just as every man
calls his enemy by half his name when he wants to show his anger or
displeasure. As when one otherwise daily calls one John, and out of
anger calls one Hans. And the prophet Jeremiah Cap. 22, 24. calls King
Jechaniah badly Chanja, whom he otherwise often calls Jechanja. So here
the Turk, whose whole name is Magog, must also be called Gog by half his
name. Although such shortening of names is often done out of love, as
one says: Lippes, Lene, Thrine, or even, du Schälklein, 1) du Büblein.

3 And Gog is a name from the Hebrew; Gag, which means a roof. That Gog
or Magog means so much, as a roof manu, or who lives under the roof.
Which rhymes, both, with the Turks, and their fathers, the Tatters. They
are both a wild, predatory people, who do not ask for houses, but, like
cattle, they live in huts, as under roofs and showers, 2) always ready
for robbery and war. And they want to be praised that they, as vain
great saints, do not build large, beautiful houses, as happens with us.
And is also fine; as the saints are, so is the holiness, and such saints
shall have such holiness, full of avarice, fornication,

1\) In the original edition: \"schelcklin\"; in the Wittenberg and Jena
editions: \"Secklin\".

2\) Orig.: Schawren.

To choose a roof for a house, just as all hypocrites do for sanctity.

\(4\) Moreover they keep not house, according to the scripture, Ps.
128:3: For they regard not marriage, neither is there any purpose set
for their fornication; they take and leave wives as they will, and so
their tents are open behind and before, and on every side, that they run
after fornication like cattle. But they have the roof as a testimony of
great abstinence and temperance.

\(5\) It is sufficiently shown before, how Gog, the Turk, has his origin
from the Tattern or red Jews, since the great Cam 3) is king; as the
countrymen say, who originally have the name Magog, Gen. 10, 2.
Therefore also the Turk must inherit such his fatherland\'s name here,
according to custom of the Scriptures, since sometimes a single person
of a whole country has a name; like St. Paul 1 Mos. 49, 27. and Ps. 68,
4) 28. Benjamin, of the whole family name, inherits, as if he alone
would be Benjamin \[Rom. 11, 1.\]. Which way also we Germans have, when
we thus say: Saxony or Saxonia held firm, since one chose the emperor,
Saxony did the best. Hereby we no longer mean Duke Frederick of Saxony,
the individual person; and if a Spaniard fights with a Venetian, one
would say: Hui Hispania, defend yourself; Hispania conquers, Venice
lies, and the like much. So here the Holy Spirit calls the Turk after
his fatherland \"Magog\", and out of anger \"Gog\".

\(6\) In the same way the word \"Israel\" is to be heard in these two
chapters. For the apostles and other disciples of Christ, coming from
the Jews, were true Israel, and have also the names of all the people of
Israel.

3\) Cam -Khan.

4\) Jni original correct, according to the Vulgate count: \"in the 67th
Psalm\". Here the Erlanger has adopted Walch\'s incorrect correction
\"Ps. 78\".

To put our writing into print. It appeared under the title: \"Das
XXXVIII vnd XXXIX Capitel Hesechiel vom Gog. Verdeudscht durch Mart.
Luther. Wittemberg MVXXX.\" At the end: \"Gedruckt zu Wittemberg durch
Nickel Schirlentz. MDXXX.\" In the collective editions: in the
Wittenberg (1551), vol. II, p. 491d; in the Jena (1566), vol. V, p. 3;
in the Altenburg, vol. V, p. 2; in the Leidiger, vol. VII, p. 493; and
in the Erlanger, vol. 41, p. 220. According to the latter, which offers
the text of the original edition, we have reproduced the writing. The
Wittenberg edition brings dm text of our Bible. Both Walch and the
Erlanger have noted the \"deviation\" of our Bible in the margin; we
have omitted this as something superfluous.

884 **Erl. 41, 223-225.** translation of Ezekiel, Cap. 38 u. 39. **W.
VI, 1410-1413.** 885

as St. Paul inherited the name Benjamin. Therefore the name Israel
remained with the apostles and was inherited by all their disciples, so
that now holy Christendom, and we also, and all who believe the word of
the apostles and are their disciples, are called Israel. Just as all
countries here must be called Gog, because they are under the Turk and
follow him, although they are not all Gog by birth, but Greeks, Moors,
Arabs and the like. For the hemp is called after the head of which is
the banner.

\(7\) Therefore, by the \"mountains of Israel\" here we must not
understand the mountains near Jerusalem where Gog is to be slain; it is
the Christian churches now and then. Among the Christians he shall lie
down; but not with the sword, but with lightning, thunder, hellish fire
from heaven. For our princes, the dear apostles, are true natural
Israel; so we Christians are under their banner, that is, under your
gospel; therefore, after their name, we are rightly and truly called
Israel. Did not the rascal Julianus call the Christians Galileans,
because they were attached to Jesus from Galilee? And all Asia must be
called Gog and Turks, because of their tyrant. Why should we not also be
called Israel for the sake of our Lord Jesus, since he is a true natural
Israel, indeed, the chief treasure of Israel, and his apostles, our
dukes, are also true Israel.

\(8\) I say this so that the interpretation of the Jews may not be
changed; this text does not concern them. Daniel Cap. 9, 26. 27. has
indicated to them their end, that they may no longer hope for an
assembly. We are the ones who have been brought together from all
nations under one Lord, Christ. And especially now, in these last times,
we are hardly brought together a little by the gospel from all erroneous
faiths. The devil notices this in Gog (says Ezekiel here) and wants to
wear us out. Because he sees that pope, emperor, kings and princes do
not like to dampen the gospel, he thinks to destroy it with power
through his Gog. For I cannot leave the thoughts, nor can I miss the
devil, that he should destroy me and the gospel.

my heap should not primarily seek mine. We must also call him Germany.
If our gospel is right, I do not lack these thoughts, and I know that
the devil must have such in mind, for he does not want and cannot stand
our gospel; he would rather tear heaven and earth apart, lest he should
wake up his Gog.

For this reason, I have omitted these two chapters all the more to
comfort and exhort our people to correction and to diligent, earnest
prayer, so that we may see the promised redemption in this text, and the
downfall of Gog, blessedly and with joy. He shows off, and has it in
mind: Gog has tasted the German blood, he intends to drink himself full
inside. Thus the devil is an enemy to us, he wants to turn us away pure.

Thus we see here at the end of the 39th chapter, v. 23, who has made the
Turk so great and powerful, who gives him so much and great victory.
Not, indeed, his multitude or power, but our sin, says the text, which
has aroused God\'s anger, and hidden his face from us, and caused the
Gog to rage so horribly.

\(11\) Let every man therefore repent, fear God, and honor his gospel.
Let us confess our sin and not deny it, then with strong prayer and
heartfelt groaning ask for help and mercy. For our presumption shall not
smite the Gog, let God\'s wrath first be removed by our repentance and
prayer, as He says here in the text, that with the Gog His wrath shall
go forth. Thunder, lightning and hellish fire shall strike him down,
just as it happened to Sanherib \[Isa. 37:36\], that is his judgment and
his end. What judgment Christians must urge and promote with their
sighing and pleading, otherwise no one will do it. For this is why the
Gospel has now appeared so brightly, that Christ wants to execute and
remedy both the Pope (as he began) and the Turks, and to redeem us once
and for all with his glorious future, which we await daily. May His
grace and mercy help us to believe firmly and to pray sincerely, amen.

887

> 886 **Eri. 41, LSb-227.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI.
> 1413-1416.** 887

**The thirty-eighth chapter.**

**V. 1. And the watt of God came to me, saying:**

**V. 2. Son of man, turn against Gog, who is of the land of Magog, and a
prince of the lords of Meshech and Thubal, and prophesy of him, and
say:**

Mesech and Thubal are also Tattern and of the people back there, who are
called Schütten or Schotten; however Mesech reads, as if the Moschobiter
come from them, that is, the Reussen.

**V. 3 Thus says God the Lord: Behold, I will be with you, Gog, who are
a prince of the lords of Meshech and Tubal.**

**V. 4. Behold, I will turn thee about, and will put a bridle in thy
mouth, and will cause thee to come forth, with all thine army, horse and
man, all well groomed, a great company, with spear and shield, and all
that bear the sword.**

**V. 5 For there are with thee Persians, and Moors, and of Libya, all
having shields and helmets.**

The Persians are adjacent to the Arabian Empire, so the Turks will also
have a number of them.

**V. 6: \"Gomer and his army, together with the house of Thogarmah,
which is on the north side, and all his army, even a great nation is
with thee.**

Gomer and Thogarma, his son, Gen. 10, 3, I think, are the Wends, because
at the Turkish court they speak Wendish.

**V. 7 Prepare thyself, thou, and all thy company that are with thee,
and be thou their keeper; that thou mayest visit long after,**

Guardian, their supreme and sole master.

**V. 8. and after many years have passed, come into the land that was
brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many nations, that
is, into the mountains of Israel, which were always desolate, and are
now executed out of many nations, and all dwell safely.**

**V. 9. you will come up like a tumultuous one, and you will be like a
cloud covering the land, you and your army, and the great people with
you.**

**V. 10. Thus says God the Lord: \"In due time it will occur to you, and
it will be evil in your mind,\" and remember:**

**V.11. I will invade the unguarded land and come upon those who dwell
securely and without care, as they all sit there without walls and have
neither bars nor gates;**

**V. 12 That thou mayest rob and plunder, and let thine hand go upon the
spoiled that are brought again, and upon the people that are gathered
out of the heathen, and that are gathered into food, and are hardly set
down, and dwell in the midst of the land.**

**V.13. The kingdom of Arabia, Dedan, and the merchants of the sea, and
all the mighty men that are there, shall say unto thee, I mean, thou art
come to rob, and hast gathered thy companies to plunder, that thou
mayest take away silver and gold, and gather cattle and goods, and
commit great robbery.**

Dedan is a piece of rich Arabia; so Mahomet is buried in rich Arabia, at
Mecha.

That is: O you do right and well, always continue, happiness to.

right, that is, you are the right emperor and lord.

**V. 14 Therefore prophesy, O son of man, and say to Gog: Thus saith GOD
the LORD; Is it not so? that thou shalt know when my people Israel shall
dwell safely,**

**V.15. So you will come out of your place, that is, from the ends
toward the north, you and a great people with you, all on horseback, a
great multitude, and a mighty army.**

**V.16. And thou shalt come up upon my people Israel, as a cloud that
covereth the land; thou shalt be cast in the latter days. But I will
bring thee into my land, that the heathen may know me, as I am
sanctified in thee, O Gog, in their sight.**

**V. 17 Thus says God the Lord: \"You are the one I spoke of in days
gone by through my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied at
that time that I would bring you upon them.**

**\
888 Erl.** 41, **LS7-SSS.** Translation of Ezekiel, Cap. 38 u. 39. **W.
VI, 1416-1418. 889**

**V.18. And it shall come to pass, when Gog shall come upon the land of
Israel, saith GOD the LORD, that my wrath shall come up in my fury.**

My anger, that is, Gog is my wrath and ruthlessness, because of my
Christians\' sin.

**V.19. And I speak these things in my zeal, and in the fire of my
wrath. At that time there will be great trembling in the land of
Israel.**

**V. 20. That the fish of the sea, the fowl of the air, the cattle of
the field, and every living thing that moveth upon the face of the
earth, and every man that is upon the earth, and the mountains, should
tremble at my presence.**

**be reversed, and the walls fall, and all the walls fall to the
ground.**

This is the work of Gog.

**V.21. But I will call upon him with the sword upon all my mountains,
saith GOD the LORD; and every man\'s sword shall be against every man\'s
sword.**

Let them strangle themselves in the army among themselves.

**V.22. And I will judge him with pestilence and blood, and will rain
down pours of fire and brimstone upon him and upon his army, and upon
the great people that are with him.**

**V. 23. So then I will be glorious, holy and known before many nations,
that they may know that I am God.**

**The Thirty-Ninth Chapter.**

**V. 1. And thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith
GOD the LORD:**

**V. 2. Behold, I will be upon thee, O Gog, who art a prince of the
lords of Meshech and Tubal. Behold, I will direct thee round about, and
lure thee, and bring thee out of the ends of midnight, and make thee
come upon the mountains of Israel;**

**V. 3. and will strike your bow out of your left hand, and throw your
arrows out of your right hand.**

**V. 4 On the mountains of Ismel you shall be laid down, you and all
your army, and the people who are with you.**

**V. 5. I will give you to the birds from whence they fly and to the
beasts of the field to eat; you shall lie down in the field, for I, God
the LORD, have said it.**

**V. 6 And I will cast fire upon Magog, and upon them that dwell in the
isles safely, and they shall know that I am God.**

\[so in the islands\] 1) dwell safely, that is, in Gog\'s country,
daheimen soll\'s auch brenne\" to it.

1\) Added by us. In the marginal glosses (St. Louiser Ausg., Vol. VIII,
Col. 1794), the keyword to which the gloss refers is \"islands.

**V. 7 For I will make known my holy name among my people Israel, and
will no longer let my holy name be profaned; but the Gentiles shall know
that I am GOD, the Holy One in Israel.**

**V. 8. Behold, it is already come and done, saith GOD the LORD; this is
the day of which I have spoken.**

**V. 9: And the citizens of the cities of Israel shall go out and make
fire, and burn the weapons, and the shields, and the spear, and the bow,
and the arrows, and the staves, and the staves: and they shall keep fire
seven years: they shall not go out into the field for wood, neither
shall they cut wood in the forest: but they shall keep fire of the
weapons. 2)**

**V.10. And they shall rob from whom they are robbed, and plunder from
whom they are plundered, saith GOD the LORD.**

2\) The words: \"that they are not allowed to\... Feuer halten\" are
omitted in the Jenaer by an oversight, therefore also with Walch, who
has reprinted from the Jenaer. Walch, thinking that these words are
missing in the original, has now noted them in the margin as a variant
of the Bible. But also the Erlangen edition, which has them in the text,
brings them again in the margin, because it has reprinted from Walch.

890 **Erl. 41, SSS-SSI.** Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI.
I4IS-1421. 891

**V. 11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog
a place to be buried in Israel, even the valley where they go by the sea
toward the east: so that they shall go no more thither, because they
have buried Gog and his multitude there: and it shall be called the
valley of Gog.**

Gogs Haufenthal, that there lie buried the great multitude and heaps of
Gogs.

**V. 12: And the house of Israel shall bury them seven months, that the
land may be cleansed.**

**V. 13. Yea, all the people of the land shall have burial in them, and
shall glory in that I have displayed my glory that day, saith GOD the
LORD.**

**V.14. And they shall set apart men that go about the land continually,
and with them the graves of the dead, to bury the rest of them in the
land, that it may be cleansed; after seven months they shall search.**

Research whether they are all buried, or whether someone still lies
unburied.

**V. 15: And they that go about the land, and see a man\'s bone, shall
set up a mark thereon, until the graves of the dead also bury it in
Gog\'s hovel.**

**V. 16. This is also the name of the city Hamonah. So they will cleanse
the land.**

Hamona, quantity or large pile.

**V. 17. Now, O son of man, thus says God the Lord: Tell all the birds
from whence they fly, and all the beasts of the field, Gather yourselves
together, and come, gather yourselves everywhere for my sacrifice, that
I may slay you, a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, and eat
flesh, and drink blood.**

**V. 18. You shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of
the princes of the earth, of rams, of heifers, of goats, of oxen, all of
which are fat and well fattened.**

**V. 19 And eat the fat that ye may be filled, and drink the blood that
ye may drink.**

**I will kill you from the sacrifice that I slaughter for you.**

**V. 20. Fill yourselves now over my table with horses and horsemen,
with mighty men and all men of war, says God the Lord.**

**V. 21. And I will bring my glory among the Gentiles, that all the
Gentiles may see my judgment which I have let go, and my hand which I
have laid upon them.**

**V.22. And so the house of Israel shall know that I, the LORD, am their
God from that day forward.**

**V.23. And all the nations also know how the house of Israel was led
away because of their iniquity, and that they had sinned against me.
Therefore have I forbidden my face before them, and delivered them into
the hands of their adversaries, that they should all fall by the
sword.**

It says that Gog is powerful because of our sin, and has so much
happiness and victory.

**V. 24. I have done to them as their sin and transgression deserved,
and so I have hidden my face from them.**

**Therefore thus says God the Lord: Now will I restore the captivity of
Jacob, and have mercy upon all the house of Israel, and will be jealous
for my holy name.**

**V. 26. But they will gladly bear their shame and their sin, so that
they have sinned against me, if only they may dwell safely in their
land, so that no one will frighten them;**

**V.27. And I brought them again out of the nations, and gathered them
out of the countries of their enemies, and I was sanctified in them in
the sight of many nations.**

**V. 28. So they will know that I, the LORD, am their God, who have led
them away among the Gentiles and gathered them again into their land,
and have not left one of them there.**

**V. 29. And I will no longer hide My face from them, for I have poured
out My Spirit on the house of Israel, says GOD the LORD.**

**\
892 Erl. 4i, 232 f.** Interpretation of the Prophet Daniel, Cap. 11 u.
12. **W.** vi. riW-iE **893**

**D. D. Martin Luther\'s interpretation of the prophet Daniel.**

The prophet Daniel German.

Written in February 1530; dated about March 1530.

**\[1. letter of the translation of the prophet Daniel to Duke John
Frederick of Saxony\].** \*)

February or March 1530.

> To the Most Serene, Highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John Frederick,
> Duke of Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia, and Margrave of Meissen, my
> gracious Lord,

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord! The world is running and hastening
to its end in such an excellent way that strong thoughts often occur to
me, as if the last day should break before we could even interpret the
holy scriptures. For this is certain, that we have nothing more temporal
to wait for in the Holy Scriptures, it is

Everything is over and done with. The Roman Empire is at its end, the
Turk is at its highest, the splendor of the papacy is falling away, and
the world is cracking at all ends almost as if it were about to break
and fall. For the fact that the same Roman Empire under our Emperor
Carolo is now rising a little and becoming more powerful than it has
been for a long time, methinks it is the last one, and before God it is
just as if a light or straw that has burned out wants to go out now, it
gives off a flame as if it wanted to burn at first, and with it it goes
out;

\*) This writing appeared under the title: \"The Prophet Daniel Deudsch.
Marti. Luther. Wittemberge. 1530.\" At the end: \"Printed at Wittemberg,
by Hans Lufft.\" Like Walch, we have added the interpretation of the
twelfth chapter. In the approximate time determinations we have given
above, we have been guided by the following. On January 3, 1530, Luther
wrote to Nicolaus Hausmann (De Wette, Vol. Ill p. 539): \"We have
corrected the New Testament to the end and in print it is more than half
finished. After that, we will get back to the translation of the
prophets.\" The first prophet Luther took in hand and finished before
his departure to Coburg (Köstlin, Martin Luther \[3\], Vol. II, p. 161)
was Daniel. On February 25, he wrote to Hausmann (De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
553): \"We are now working on the publication of Daniel for comfort in
this last time.\" We have omitted the translation of the prophet
himself, which follows the preface in the original, because it does not
differ much from that found in our Bible. Therefore, immediately after
the preface, we bring the interpretation of the 12th chapter, most of
which was worked out later. We are not able to give a reasonably precise
time determination for this interpretation. All we know is this: in the
first complete Bible edition of 1534, just as in the edition of the
translation of 1530, only the beginning and the end of the
interpretation of the 12th chapter is found; it is completely inserted
in later Bible editions. Johann Freder translated it into Latin together
with the preface. This translation was published in 1544 at Frankfurt am
Main (von der Hardt, autoAr. ImtUsri, tom. II, pa.\]. 255) under the
title: 6omm6ntariu8 D. Doot. Älartinl ImtUsrl in Oamslsm proptmtam, and
included in the Latin Wittenberg edition (1552), tom. IV, col. 324. A
complete German single edition did not come out until 1546 under the
title: \"Das zwelfste Capitel Danielis, mit der Auslegung D. Martini
Lutheri, seer nützlich und tröstlich zu lesen zu diesen fehrlichen
Zeiten. Witteberg: Gedruckt durch Hans Lufft, 1546.\" In the German
Gesammtansgaben, our writing (complete as we give it) is found only in
the Leipziger, vol. XII, p. 21, by Walch, and in the Erlanger, vol. 41,
p. 232. Altern the letter to Duke Johann Friedrich: in the Wittenberger
(1569), vol. IX, bl. 543; in the Jenaer (1566), vol. V, p. 1 and in
theAltenburger, vol. V, p. 1. Also in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 554 and
(duplicate) in the Erlanger, vol. 54, p. 134. Also in several Bible
editions the preface and the interpretation of the 12th chapter is
complete, e.g. in the Weimarsche Bibel and in the Altenburger Bibel. We
give the preface according to the later redaction and indicate the
deviations of the first edition in notes.

894 **Grl. 4l, 233-236.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI.
1424-1427.** 895

Just as Christianity is doing now with such a bright gospel.

\(2\) All the prophets, besides and apart from the Scriptures, write
that after this time, namely after the present thirtieth year, all will
be well again. Which, if they are right and true, I hope will be the
last day, which will deliver us from all evil and help us to eternal
joy. So that I do not count this time of the bright gospel differently
than the time in which God shortens and controls the tribulation through
the gospel; since Christ says of Matth. 24, 22: \"If the Lord did not
shorten these days, no man would be saved. For if the world had stood
longer as it stood before, all the world would certainly have become
mahometic or epicurean, and no Christian would have remained, as Christ
says \[Luc. 18:8\], \"Thinkest thou, when the Son of man cometh, that he
also shall find faith on the earth?\" There was already no real
understanding or teaching of the Christian faith, but only error,
darkness and superstition with countless heaps.

\(3\) There has certainly been no greater tribulation on earth, nor will
there be, that has gone further, lasted longer, and raged more horribly
than the abominations of Mahomet and Pabst, which have corrupted all the
world with blood and murder without ceasing in the flesh, but much more
horribly with the destruction of souls and murder, as the third woe of
Revelation 12:12 ff. shows. 12, 12. ff. also shows that one must say
that the devil is loose and reigns bodily within, according to all fury
and will of courage. These and similar thoughts have caused us to omit
this prophet Daniel from the others who are still behind, so that he may
come to light before everything is destroyed, and he may fulfill his
ministry and comfort the wretched Christians, for whose sake he was
written and saved for this last time.

Because it is not only comforting to the common Christian man, but also
useful to kings and princes, as he has to do with kings and princes
through and through, and all his prophecy is about kingdoms and
princedoms, I have decided to publish it under E. F. G.\'s name.

and to throw it among the princes, so that they have something princely
to read, if some wanted to ask for its spirit and comfort; 1) for it is
also a royal and princely book. The Histories praise the great Alexander
that he always had the poet Homerum with him, and at night laid it under
his head and slept on it. How much more appropriate it would be that
such and even greater honor be done to this Daniel by all kings and
princes, that he not only be placed under their head, but also in their
heart, because he teaches other and higher things than Homerus could
have done.

For in this a prince can learn to fear and trust God, when he sees and
recognizes that God loves the righteous princes and so rules graciously,
giving them all happiness and salvation. Again, that he hates the wicked
princes, wrathfully overthrows them, and savagely deals with them. For
here we learn that no ruler should rely on his own power or wisdom, nor
defy and insist on it. For there is no kingdom, nor regiment, in human
power or wisdom, but it is God alone who gives, sets, holds, governs,
protects, preserves, and also takes away. In his hand all things are
gathered, and in his power they float, like a ship on the sea, yes, like
a cloud under the sky. Again, we learn that no ruler should lose heart
or worry too much in his powerlessness or weakness or uselessness. For
just as an empire does not stand by man\'s strength and wits, neither
does it fall by man\'s strength and witticisms, as many examples are
found of great and mighty kings being defeated by few people, and often
the most clever ones being put to shame; but they remained and
triumphed, seeing neither strength nor witticisms.

I mean, in our time the Venetians, Pabst, France should help to witness
all this. For God is steadfast in the high ones (says the 93rd Psalm,
v. 1. ff.). \"He does with kingdoms as He wills\" (says Daniel Cap. 6,
26. 27. and Cap. 4, 14. 22.), not as we or mankind wills.

1\) So the Wittenbergers and the Jenaers. De Wette and the Erlangeners:
\"do not want to ask\".

**896 Erl. 41, 23\" f.** Interpretation of the Prophet Daniel, Cap. 11
u. 12. **W. VI. 1427-1432. 897**

and gives them to whom He wills\", not to whom we will or think. The
heathen did not know this, nor do all unbelievers and godless know it.
They have authority and dominion, but they do not know that it is a
donum et^1^ creatura Dei, that is, a gift and creature of God, which he
makes out of nothing, and receives out of nothing, and gives for
nothing, and yet keeps in his hand to govern it. For this reason, the
wicked are not able to get involved, but it becomes vain in their hands,
2) and they have a lot of trouble with it, a lot of worry, and a lot of
vain attempts, which they never bring to the half, and they are the most
miserable people; before they once become happy with their rule, they
die or lose it. That makes them think that it is their own, that God has
thrown it out of their hands, and they let themselves rule and master
with their wisdom and power. That goes then very finely before itself,
like the cancer course.

\(7\) But Daniel indicates here that even if the strength and wit of men
were able (as it is not) to administer a dominion, such strength and wit
could do nothing in the face of devils and evil spirits. For every
dominion has its princes from hell: the greater the dominion, the
greater and more wicked the devils, who lay all plagues on the kings and
lords, with hindrances, with provocations to wrath, strife, murder,
pride, fornication, and all

1\) De Wette: \"ete.,\" instead of: et. This has been reprinted in the
Erlangen edition vol. 54, p. 137.

2\) In all editions, \"vain\"; but it is to be taken substantivally, a
nothing, as St. Louiser ed. vol. XX, 852. Old ed. vol. V, 44.

vices, that God in turn must also keep good angels and princes from
heaven with the kings and lords against the devil, as we read here in
Daniel. What then will a poor flesh and blood presume to rule with his
power or wit such great angelic and 3) divine things?

I hope, however, that this Daniel should be a dear Daniel, whom also the
heavenly princes, the angels themselves, more than once call \"dear
Daniel\", and the dear man, as whom they loved with all their hearts. In
the same way, all his lords and kings loved and valued him. This will,
if God wills, be done much more by E. F. G., who by God\'s grace is more
abundantly gifted with desire and love for the Holy Scriptures and all
wisdom, more than those kings, both at Babylon and in Persia, because at
that time the truth did not come forth so brightly and powerfully. So
too, praise God! E. F. G. is not so inclined to quarrel and to do harm,
with which thoughts now daily deal, which want to give the most
princely. Christ, our Lord, graciously willed in E. F. G. to strengthen,
increase and preserve the gifts he has begun, reason and wisdom, and to
protect him from all the false wiles and cunning of the enemy, together
with his followers, for the salvation of all the world, and in honor of
his holy name and gospel. This is what we all wish and ask from the
bottom of our hearts, amen.

> E. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

3\) De bet: \"yes\" instead of: and.

**2. preface \[on the prophet Daniel, together with the interpretation
of the eleventh and twelfth chapters\].**

In order that the simple, and those who neither know nor can read
history, 4) may nevertheless hear this Book of St. Daniel to some
extent, I want to provide with this preface a

4\) This is what Freder has expressed: Hui vullava distoriarura
coAnitionem Kader\", nee distoriis IsMvckis vaoare possuut.

give a little instruction. And first, how Daniel came to Babylon some
years before the destruction of Jerusalem, under King Jehoiakim, whom
King Nebuchadnezzar had captured and bound, and was about to bring him
to Babylon, and yet was advised otherwise, and left him there, but
brought some of the best

898 **Erl. 41, 237-240.** interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1432-1434. 899

People (among whom Daniel was also) and vessels from the temple with
him; of all this is found in the other book of Kings at chapter 24, vv.
14-16, and in \[the second book of\] Chronicles at chapter 36, v. 20.

In the first chapter there is a beautiful example of the life of Daniel,
how holy, how God-fearing, and how he was of a great, chivalrous faith
in God, under such a desolate, pagan nature, and under so many terrible
adversities, which he had to see and hear daily at Babylon, and yet
remained firm and steadfast, overcoming all this in his heart. Therefore
it follows soon after, how God shows him such great grace, and first
honors him spiritually, endows him with wisdom and understanding over
all men, and then also sets him high worldly, and does mighty, great
miracles and works through him. That he may show us all how dear and
precious he is to those who fear him and trust in him. And with such a
great example, he kindly entices us to fear God and believe.

In the other chapter, Daniel\'s honor begins with the king\'s dream,
which Daniel finds and interprets from divine revelation. Thereby he
becomes a prince in the whole country of Babylon, and a bishop or chief
over all clergymen and scholars. This is also done for the comfort of
the Jewish people, so that they should not doubt or be impatient in
their misery, as if God had rejected them and abandoned his promise of
Christ. Therefore a captive Jew must rule such a great kingdom, and no
Babylonian must have such honor; just as if he had been led away captive
to become such a 2) great lord, even over those who had and held him
captive. God leads His faithful so wonderfully, and gives much more than
a man can desire.

4\. but the dream and the image is clearly interpreted in the text by
Daniel himself of the four kingdoms, as there is the first, the
Assyrians or Babylonians, the other, the Medes and Persians, the third,
the great Alexander, and

1\) In the Erlangen edition after the single print: \"whole\", but this
is neither in Freder nor in the Weimar Bible (1686).

2\) \"a\" is missing in the Erlanger.

the Greeks, the fourth, the Romans. In this interpretation and opinion,
all the world is unanimous, and the work and the histories also prove it
tremendously.

But he talks about the Roman Empire the most and the longest. Therefore,
we must also listen diligently. At the end, when the iron thighs begin
to divide into toes and feet, he points out three pieces of the Roman
Empire.

The first is that the toes are divided, but nevertheless retain the
origin of the iron foot, just as in the human body the toes also divide,
but nevertheless grow from the foot and belong to the foot. Thus the
Roman Empire was divided, since Hispania, France, England, and other
parts came from it. But it has nevertheless grown out of it, and like a
plant has been transferred (as they call it), translatum, from the
Greeks to the Germans; so that nevertheless the iron kind remains there;
for it still has its estates, offices, rights and laws, as it had before
times. That is why he speaks here: Even though it will be a divided
kingdom, iron\'s root, plant or trunk will still be in it.

The other piece, that such divided toes are unequal, one part iron, one
part clay, which he himself interprets, that it should be such a divided
empire, that it is either powerful or weak, that is found. For it has
often had many a female emperor, as Carolum Magnum, the three Ottones,
and the like, who have been unconquerable. Again, also often weak and
unfortunate emperors, who have often been overcome. But all this is said
so that we may know how the Roman Empire is to be the last, and no one
is to break it except Christ alone with his kingdom. Therefore, even if
many kings set themselves against the German Empire, and the Turk also
rages against it, and they may all win a battle or two, they must not
become powerful over such an iron root and plant, or even eradicate it.
It must remain until the last day, however weak it may be. For Daniel
does not lie, and so far experience has proved, both in popes themselves
and in kings.

[**900 Erl. 41, 24O-24L.** Interpretation of the prophet Daniel, chap.
11 & 12. **W. VI, I4S4-1437. 901**]{.underline}

8 The third part, that such divided, unequal toes are joined together,
or that one is exchanged for the other, he himself indicates that it
will be such a weak kingdom, which will patch itself up with alliance
and friendship with other kings and strengthen itself; but it will still
not help, nor find loyalty. And must therefore have its strength and
victory by God\'s providence alone, if it is to be.

\(9\) Some interpret the mountain, from which the stone is torn without
human hands, to be the holy Virgin Mary, from whom Christ was born,
without human intervention; and this is not unchristian. But the
mountain may also be the whole Jewish kingdom, from which Christ came
and is their flesh and blood, and yet is now torn from them and comes
among the Gentiles; then he became a Lord in all the world, in all these
four kingdoms, and will remain so.

In the third chapter he writes again a great miraculous sign of faith,
that 1) the three men are preserved in the fiery furnace. Thus God was
known and praised by the king, through the whole kingdom, even with the
Scriptures. This is done to comfort the captive Jews, who, together with
their God, were despised and were nothing at Babel among the tyrants and
false gods. But here their God is highly honored above all gods, so that
they may firmly believe that he can and will redeem them in due time,
and that they will hold on to and take comfort in his honor and
miracles.

In the fourth chapter, there is an excellent example against the madmen
and tyrants. For there the great, mighty king is robbed of his reason,
and becomes so furious and mad that, like a mad dog, he must be bound
with chains and made to walk in the field, whom the people do not like.
Now, because it is written in the book, it seems a small thing; but if
we had been there and seen it, we would have seen a terrible, horrible
judgment of God, so that everyone would have had to take pity from the
heart on all overlords and evil tyrants, that they had so

1\) Erlanger: da. Freder: auoä. Weim. Bible: that.

cruel judgment must await where they abuse their dominion.

\(12\) This is also done for the comfort of the wretched captive Jews at
that time, and now and forever to all who are tormented by tyrants or
suffer injustice, that they may see how God wills and is able to avenge
us on our enemies, more than we may desire, as the 58th Psalm, v. 11,
also says: \"The righteous will see vengeance with joy, and bathe his
course in the blood of the wicked. Therefore, we should not only suffer
such tyrants patiently, but also have mercy on their future judgment and
pray for them heartily. Just as the pious Daniel does here, and grieves
that the king (who had captured them and destroyed their land) should
suffer so much, and would rather wish it on his enemies.

\(13\) But again, for the pious lords and princes, this is a comforting,
lovely image, that God the Lord also models this tyrannical king by a
beautiful tree, which nourishes all animals and lets them rest under its
shade, so that God shows that He gives and preserves rest and peace,
protection and protection, food and goods, and all this temporal life
through authority, and that it is almost pleasing to Him where a lord or
prince exercises such his office diligently. For they are beautiful
fruits, beautiful branches, beautiful foliage\' (he says), that is, they
are delicious, noble, good works. Because it pleases God Himself to
paint, praise and adorn them so finely, a gentleman should pursue his
office with joy and love, even though it is full of toil and labor. So
we should not consider how evil the tyrants are, but how deliciously
useful an office they have from God, appointed for our good and
salvation.

14 In the fifth chapter there is another example against the tyrants.
For the preceding example is still tolerable, because the same king
allows himself to be punished, and turns to God with right repentance,
humility and confession, that he has undoubtedly become a great saint
from a tyrant. But here the stubborn, unrepentant tyrant, who is safe
and cheerful, is punished in his wickedness, without all mercy, so that
he loses body and liver, country and people all at once. Which, of
course, is written to the horror of all such tyrants.

**902 Erl. 41, 242-244.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI,
1437-1489. 903**

In the sixth chapter comes a fine, lovely example, where there is a
fine, pious king who loves Daniel. Daniel also has to repay the other
great Hansen, who prove him a court treasure, and is also finally thrown
into the lions\' hole. There the captive, miserable Jews will have been
saddened again. But God again proves Himself honest and comforting, and
turns the game so finely that Daniel\'s enemies themselves had to eat up
what they had brought him; as the 7th Psalm, v. 15, 17, says: \"They are
pregnant with misfortune, but they give birth to a mistake. Their
calamity falls on their head, and their iniquity on their vertebra.\" So
Daniel\'s life is nothing else but a fine, pure mirror, in which one
sees the struggle and victory of faith by God\'s grace against all
devils and men, and his great fruit and benefit, which he creates
through patience and the cross, both before God and the world.

In the seventh chapter the visions and prophecies of the future kingdoms
and especially of the kingdom of Christ, for the sake of which all these
visions take place. And to the first, the four kingdoms, which he has
shown in a large picture in chapter 2, v. 31, he sees here again in
another form, namely in four beasts, mostly for the sake of the fourth
beast, the Roman Empire, of which he wants to say something further. For
under the same Roman empire the greatest thing on earth was to happen,
namely Christ was to come, redeem mankind, and the world was to come to
an end.

\(17\) Now the first beast is the kingdom of Assyria and Babylon, that
is, the lion with the two eagle\'s wings; for it is the noblest and
best, and (as said above) has been the golden kingdom above all. The two
wings are the two pieces of the kingdom, Assyria and Babylon. And a
human heart is given to it, and it stands on its feet, for none of the
other kingdoms has had such a king, who has come to the knowledge of God
so wonderfully, nor has had so many great, holy, wise people at court as
this kingdom.

18\. the other animal, the bear, is the kingdom of Persia and Medes,
which destroyed the previous one at Babylon and gave it its wings.

gel. And has under his teeth three ribs (which are three large, long
teeth), which are the most distinguished kings, Cyrus, Darius and
Xerxes, who have done the most in this kingdom, and have eaten much
flesh, that is, have won great lands.

The third animal, the Parde, with four wings and four heads, is the
kingdom of the great Alexander in Greece, from which afterwards four
kingdoms have become, as we will hear in the following chapter.

The fourth beast, with the iron teeth, is now the righteous, 1) the
last, namely, the Roman kingdom, with which the world shall have an end.
As Daniel here says much about the last judgment and about the holy
kingdom, which is to follow after this kingdom. But he paints the same
Roman kingdom in such a way that \[it\] shall first be divided into ten
kingdoms; these are the ten horns, as Syria, Egypt, Asia, Grecia,
Africa, Hispania, Gallia, Italia, Germania, Anglia; And that one little
horn should repel three horns from the foremost ten horns, that is,
Mahomet, or the Turk, who now has Egypt, Asia, and Graecia; and how that
same little horn should impugn the saints, and blaspheme Christ; which
all we know, and see before our eyes. For the Turk has had great victory
over the Christians, and yet denies Christ, and exalts his Mahomet above
all things, so that we now certainly have nothing to wait for but the
last day; for the Turk will no longer cast off horns over the three.

In the eighth chapter Daniel has a special vision, not concerning the
whole world, as in the previous chapter, but concerning his people, the
Jews, how they would fare before the Roman Empire, and before Christ
came, that is, under the third kingdom of the great Alexander: that they
might be comforted once more, and not despair in the affliction that
would come upon them, as if Christ would leave them once more, and not
come.

022 And Daniel\'s own vision shows that the ram with the two horns is
the one with the two horns.

1\) rechtschuldige - right, that which is actually meant. This is how
the word \"rechtschuldig\" is still used in Low German, so it is not to
be written in two words. The Weimar Bible has it correctly.

[**904 Erl.** 41, 244-24\". Interpretation of the Prophet Daniel, Cap.
II u. 12. **W. VI, I4SS-I442. 905**]{.underline}

be the king in Medes and Persia. The he-goat is the great Alexander, who
defeated Darium, the last king in Persia, and won his kingdom. And
Daniel says that the goat also flew so that it did not touch the earth.
For Alexander went so swiftly that in twelve years he conquered the
world, and began when he was twenty years old, and died in the
thirty-second year; that, to be sure, for one person no greater man (to
speak after the world) has come on earth, nor will come. But what soon
rises, that also soon passes away, because his kingdom disintegrated
immediately, when he died, and became the 1) four kingdoms, Syria,
Egypt, Asia, Graecia.

023 Now Daniel left the two, Asia and Grecia, and took the two, Syria
and Egypt, before him. For between these two is the land of the Jews,
having Syria on the north side, and Egypt on the south side, which had
perpetual strife with one another. Therefore the Jews were troubled on
both sides because they were caught between them. Now they fell to
Egypt, now to Syria, after which one kingdom was superior to the other,
and they had to repay their neighbors badly, as happens in wars.
Especially when the loose man was king in Syria, whom the histories call
Antiochum the Noble, he attacked the Jews atrociously, strangled and
raged as a devil among them: he put down the worship at Jerusalem,
disgraced the temple, plundered and took all the treasures, set up
idolatry and idols inside, chased away and killed the priests, and
everything that did not want what he wanted. He wanted to turn all kinds
of faith into one faith, and that was to be the faith of the Greeks. For
this purpose he was helped by some apostate boys from the Jews, who
otherwise could not rise, as it is found in the first chapter of the
first book of the Maccabees. But he did not do it for long.

24 Now of this Antiocho Daniel says here, that after Alexander there
came out of the four horns one little horn, that is, Antiochus the
noble, out of the horn of Syria; who was mighty toward the south, toward
the east, and toward the precious land, that is, the Jewish land.

1\) Erlanger: this.

For Antiochus took from the king in Egypt much land and cities by great
treacherousness and mischievousness, as will follow in the 11th chapter.
He also threw many stars to the earth, so that many holy people among
the Jews perished; he devastated and desecrated the worship of God from
heaven in the temple and put idolatry 2) there. Against such devils God
raised up Judah Maccabee and his brothers, who fought and did great and
righteous deeds, killing almost two hundred thousand men in five years,
Macc. Book 2, and cleansed the land and the temple, and restored all
things. As it says here in the text that the temple is to be cleansed
after two thousand and three hundred days, which make six years and a
quarter of a year; for Antiochus also raged against the Jews just as
long, and died also in the seventh year. And the number is fine, as the
Book of Maccabeorum proves.

\(25\) Therefore the angel says here that the king Antiochus will do
great harm, and is an insolent, impudent king. For he also led a loose,
shameful life for his person, in all fornication, as the histories
write. But he shall be broken (he says) without hand. Because he wanted
to get money in Persia, he ordered his captain Lysias to exterminate the
Jews. But since he could not get money, and heard that Judas Maccabaeus
had defeated and put down Lysiam with his army, he was sickened with
great anger and impatience that \[it\] had not gone according to his
mind, and so died of great sorrow and lamentation in foreign lands \[1
Macc. 6:1-16\].

This is what will happen to the tyrants. For this Antiochus is here set
as an example of all evil kings and princes, especially of those who
rage against God and his word. That is why all previous teachers have
called and interpreted this Antiochus a figure of the end of Christ, and
they have hit it right. For such a fierce filth, and such a fierce
tyrant should be chosen as a model of the last abomination, as also some
words in this

2\) Erlanger: \"Abgötter\". The Weimar offers \"Abgötterei\", and Freder
translates: 6t oultus iäolatrioos kntrstituit.

**906** Erl. 41, S4S-249. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
1442-1445. **907**

and in the 12th chapter \[Cap. 11, 36.\] to be remembered and secretly
indicated.

The ninth chapter has first a very beautiful prayer, in which Daniel
prays for his people, who were captives at Babylon, and for the city of
Jerusalem, and the temple, that the Jews may return home and restore the
service of God. The prayer is heard, and more is revealed to him,
because he asks, 1) how many years are left until Christ comes and his
eternal kingdom begins. And this is an excellent, great revelation of
Christ, which so certainly and exactly determines the time.

\(28\) The seventy weeks, which the angel decrees, all teachers keep
together, they are weeks of years and not weeks of days (that is), one
week keeps seven years and not seven days. Which also experience
enforces. For seventy weeks of days do not yet make two years; that
would not be a special time for such a glorious revelation. So these
seventy weeks make four hundred and ninety years. That is how long one
should wait for Christ, and then he should begin his kingdom.

29 Now here it is to be inquired where and when these seventy weeks
begin? The angel indicates them, and begins in the year when the word
goes out that Jerusalem is to be built again 2c. For thus he saith \[v.
25\], From the time that the word shall go forth that Jerusalem shall be
built again, 2c. which some 2) have stretched and drawn out desolately.
Our opinion is, that one should begin 3) with these seventy weeks at the
other year of the king Darii, who was called Longhand. For in the same
year the word of God came through the prophets Haggaeus and Zechariah,
and called Zorobabel to build the temple, as is found in both prophets,
Hagg. 1, 1. 2. Zech. 1, 1. 7. The same Darms also commanded the same,
and his commandment was also based on it, Ezr. 6, 1.

30\. 31. For from the first year of Cyri, who released the captive Jews,
to

1\) Erlanger: \"heard, and is revealed to him\". The Weimar Bible and
Freder have our reading.

2\) Weimar Bible: \"viel haben so und so\"; Freder: yuiäuna ooaotiuk.
The Erlanger has our reading.

3\) In the 1530 edition: \"But that we act properly from it, one should
anfahen\" 2c.

The other year, Darii, is forty-six years, during which they could not
build, nor were they allowed to build, because of the prohibition of
Cambyses, the son of Cyri, so that they also despaired, and said (as
Haggaeus Cap. 1, 2. says), \"It will not yet be time to build the house
of the Lord. And this may be the forty-six years, of which the Jews say
to Christ Joh. 2, 20: \"This temple was built in forty-six years, and
you want to build it in three days?\" that is, it took forty-six years
before the temple could be properly begun to be built; so it was
difficult; for after that it was quickly built in four years, Esr. 6,
15. 4)

32 Thus the angel divides the whole seventy 5) weeks into three parts.
In the first seven weeks, that is, from the other year of Darii.

4\) Instead of this paragraph, the following is found in the 1530
edition and in the first complete Bible edition of 1534: And does the
account also apply. For from the same command or word that went out
through Haggum until Christ\'s baptism, when he took his office and
began his kingdom or new testament (as the angel here describes a
prince), there are casually four hundred and eighty-three years, which
make these weeks sixty-nine, of which the angel here says: \"Until
Christ the prince, there are seven weeks, and sixty-two weeks,\" which
is sixty-nine weeks. The calculation stands thus: After the other year
Darii, up to the great Alexander, are hundred and forty-five years, as
Metasthenes writes. From Alexander to the birth of Christ, three hundred
and eleven years, as the Histories testify. From the birth of Christ to
his baptism, thirty years, Luc. 3, 23. All this together makes four
hundred and eighty-six years, which are the sixty-nine weeks. Three
years remain, which must be added to the account, because in such
accounts and histories it often happens that half a year is called a
whole year. One cannot hit and grasp all days and hours so exactly when
one writes histories; it) is enough for us that one hits it so close,
especially because we have so certain writing of the main thing. From
this opinion are not far, who began such seventy weeks at the twentieth
and last year of Cambyses, the Darii father, who let Nehemiah go to
build Jerusalem; Nehem. 2, 6. For the twentieth year of Cambyses was two
years before the Darii other year. But if a great thing happens within
three years, it must be summarized as one year or one time, and say,
\"It happened at that time,\" just as we must say here: The word of God
went out that Jerusalem should be built in the other year of Darios,
about the time that Nehemiah came from Cambyse and began to build
Jerusalem 2c. For there was a great Dina, and it was begun by many, even
by the angels themselves, Zech. 1:13, and yet not by all at the same
time in one day or hour.

5\) In the 1530 edition: \"Weiter theilet der Engel diese siebenzig\"
2c.

**968 Grl. 41, S4S-SS1.** Interpretation of the Prophet Daniel, Cap. II
u. 12. **W. VI, 1448-1448. 909**

Until the forty-ninth year, the walls and streets will be rebuilt in a
short time. For they were also sore because the surrounding countries
were very repugnant to them, 1) as Nehemiah 2:10 is written, who came to
their aid from Persia in the twentieth year of Darii, that is, in the
eighteenth year after the outgoing words of Haggai, sent by Dario, or
rather permitted by grace. For also Daniel Cap. 10, 13. complains that
the prince in Persia resisted him at court twenty-one days; perhaps
means angelic days, or twenty-one years.

33 \[Cap. 9, 26.:\] \"After that sixty-two weeks Christ shall be cut
off.\" These sixty-two, and those seven together, make sixty-nine weeks,
that is, four hundred and eighty-three years. So there remains one and
the last week (that is, seven year) of the seventy weeks. For the angel
clearly says that Christ is not to be killed in the middle of the last
week (as we thought), but after the sixty-two weeks, that is, in the
first year of the last week, or in the beginning of the last week, in
which, he says, he will confirm the covenant to many. For in the same
last week, or seven years, the gospel went forth mightily with signs and
wonders by the Holy Spirit, and many thousands of Jews were converted,
and also many Gentiles, as Lucas writes in the Acts of the Apostles,
that it may well be called the right Easter week, from the Paschal day,
that is, from the resurrection of Christ.

But in the middle of the same week the sacrifice and grain offering were
to fall and cease. For almost three years after the resurrection of
Christ, the Apostle Concilium was held, Apost. 15:6, and the law of
Moses was publicly abolished, and the Gentiles, and even all the Jews,
were absolved from it, v. 28, so that it would not have to be kept, nor
would it be necessary for salvation, and it would also be infallible, as
St. Peter preaches there. So it turns out that the seventy weeks end
with the

1\) Instead of what follows in this paragraph, the statement of 1530:
\"Here it is agreed, when the Jews said to Christ Joh. 2, 20: This
temple was built in forty-six years, and you want to build it in three
days? After that about sixty-two weeks (saith he) Christ shall be
slain.\"

seventh year after Christ\'s resurrection. Then the stubborn Jews and
the stiff-necked Jerusalem are finished, and the apostles turn to the
Gentiles, as St. Paul says Apost. 13, 46.

35 And we see from this that the angel \[v. 25\] calls Christ a prince,
not from his baptism or preaching ministry (as we meant before), but
from his resurrection, when, having entered into his glory through his
suffering and sat at the right hand of God, he became a reigning Lord;
as all kings and princes in Scripture are called princes from their
beginning reign. For from his baptism he became a servant of the
circumcision, as St. Paul says Rom. 15:8, yes, of all the world through
his suffering 2c.

36\. the angel looks with the word \[Cap. 9, 26.\]: \"Christ will be cut
off, and nothing will be anymore\", to the saying Is. 53, 8. (although
they are different letters): \"He is cut off from the land of the
living.\" And the opinion is that Christ\'s kingdom should be a new,
spiritual, heavenly kingdom, retaining nothing everywhere, neither of
the law of Moses, nor of the worldly kingdom, but leaving all this, and
beginning and having another, new, eternal, heavenly kingdom, as the
16th Psalm, v. 4, also says: \"I will not sacrifice her libation and her
blood, nor use her name in my mouth. As the prophets all speak of the
kingdom of Christ.

37 With this calculation the other calculation may easily agree, as,
from the other year Darii to the great Alexandrum are a hundred and
forty-five years, as Metasthenes writes. From Alexandro to the birth of
Christ three hundred and five, as the Histories testify. (*Alii* 310.)
From the birth of Christ to his baptism thirty years. After that, three
years until his passion. Makes all four hundred and eighty-three, that
is sixty-nine weeks. But that there are some who dispute about the five
remaining years, let us not be mistaken. It is a pity that the pagan and
other histories correspond so exactly with Daniel. 2)

2\) Instead of U 33-37, the following is found in the 1530 edition and
in the first complete Bible edition of 1534: Here he indicates what is
to happen when these sixty-nine weeks are over, and Christ has now
begun, namely, Christ is to be crucified (which happened in the fourth
year after the sixty-nine weeks,

**910** Erl. 41, 251-253. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi.
144s-1450. **911**

The tenth chapter is a preface to the eleventh. In it, however, Daniel
writes something special about the angels that is not found anywhere
else in Scripture, namely, that the good angels fight with the evil ones
and defend mankind. And he also calls the evil angels princes, and says,
the prince from Greece. Hence it may be understood why things are so
wild and wild in the courts of kings and princes, and the good is so
hindered, and war and misfortune are wrought. For the devils are there,
agitating and inciting, or hindering so much that it does not want to go
anywhere. For example, when the Jews were to be delivered from Babylon
by the kings of Persia, it would not go anywhere, even though the kings
were glad to do it. This angel says here \[v. 20\] that he has to fight
against the prince of Persia, and yet he worries about where he is
going, because the prince is from Greece. As if he should say: Where we
steer one misfortune, there the devil always causes another: If ye be
loosed from Babylon, the Greeks shall afflict you.

and after its beginning) and the city Jerusalem shall finally be
destroyed over it, and Judaism shall have an end (which happened by the
Romans afterwards). The one and last week, that is, seven years, is the
time that follows after the sixty-nine weeks, in which (as it is said)
Christ was to be killed. And this is thus come to pass (saith he), \"He
shall perform the covenant unto many one week.\" For the preaching of
Christ went on mightily these seven years, both by Christ himself into
the fourth year, and afterward by the apostles, preaching to them the
promised grace. And in the middle of the same week, that is, in the
fourth year after Christ\'s baptism, he was killed. And there fell the
sacrifice, that is, by Christ\'s death, which is the true sacrifice, the
Jewish sacrifice and worship was taken up. After that, the Romans under
Emperor Caius Caligula put an idol in the temple (as he says here), as a
sign that the temple and Judaism should be finished.

Enough of that now, because it takes more space and time to talk about
it further.

39 In the eleventh chapter Daniel prophesies to his people, the Jews,
almost in the same way as he does in the eighth chapter, about the great
Alexandra, and the two kingdoms of Syria and Egypt, mostly for the sake
of Antiochus (who is called Noble), who should plague the Jews. But he
paints him in such a way that he finally ends his words by describing
the end of Christ under the person of Antiochus, and thus this meets our
last time, hard before the last day. For also all teachers unanimously
point such prophecy of Antiocho to the end-Christ. And the words give it
and also force it that he does not mean the noble one alone, but mixes
the noble one and the end-Christ under each other, and thus confuses his
bright, light words willingly.

40 \"Yet three kings,\" saith he \[Cap. 11:2\], \"shall stand in
Persia.\" He does not mean that Persia should have so few kings as the
Jews indicate, for they had at least ten kings. But these four are
called standing in Persia because they were something special before the
others: as, after Cores came Cambyses, Darius, Xerxes, these are the
four most distinguished. And this Xerxes was the richest, and fought
with countless people against the Greeks; but he lost shamefully, and
barely escaped himself. After him came Alexander and his four
descendants, not of his tribe or blood.

Forty-one: Now the two kingdoms of Syria and Egypt are seen scratching
and wrestling with each other. Here the names of the kings must be
written on a sheet of paper, so that the history and the text are not
misleading:

  ---------------------- ------------------ -------------- -----------------
  **The great                                              
  Alexander.**                                             

  **King Seleucus        **King Antigonus   **King         **King Ptolemy in
  Nicanor\*) in Syria.** in Asia.**         Antipater in   Egypt.**
                                            Graecia.**     

  **Antiochus Soter.**                                     **Ptolemy
                                                           Philadelphus.**

  **Antiochus Theos.                        ~~\' \> \-- -  **Ptolemy
  Bernice - (siblings                       -~~            Euergetes.**
  )**                                                      

  **Seleucus                                               **Ptolemy
  Callinicus.\*\*)                                         Philopator.**
  Antiochus Hierax.**                                      

  **Seleucus Ceraunus.                                     **Ptolemy
  The great Antiochus.**                                   Epiphanes.**

  **Seleucus Philopator.                                   **Ptolemy
  Antiochus Epiphanes,                                     Philometor.**
  the Noble.                                               
  Cleopatra.**                                             
  ---------------------- ------------------ -------------- -----------------

**\*) Instead of \"Nicanor\" in the editions should be put
\"Nicator\".**

**\*\*) In the editions: Gallinicus; likewise also below.**

**\
912 Erl. 41, S53-25S.** Interpretation of the Prophet Daniel, Cap. 11 &
12. **W. VI, 14S0-I4S3. 913**

After Alexander, the kingdom in Egypt became very powerful, of which
Daniel says here. Likewise, the kingdom in Syria also, that none of them
could overcome the other, nor bring it under itself, as they often tried
and would have liked to do.

The first war was between Antiochus Theos and Ptolemy Philadelphus, but
since they fought for a long time, they got along. And Ptolemy
Philadelphus was especially a fine king, who was fond of peace and all
kinds of arts, and contained many learned people, gathered a beautiful
liberei from all over the world, did much good to the Jews, and
beautifully decorated the temple and worship at Jerusalem, so that I
think he was also one of the holy kings. The same gave his only
daughter, called Bernice, to Antiocho Theo, so that the peace would be
the more firm, and died afterwards. She, Bernice, as the daughter of a
powerful king, and now a powerful queen and woman at court, wanted her
son to inherit the kingdom of Syria. But it failed; for Laodicea, the
former queen Antiochi Thei, together with her two sons, Seleuco
Callinico and Antiocho Hierax, were hostile to her and her son, and
wanted to inherit the kingdom themselves. And she gave poison to her
lord, Antiocho Theo, and after that she set the two sons on Bernice, her
stepmother, who chased them away, and finally killed them with child and
with all the court servants. This is what Daniel means here, since he
says \[Cap. 11, 6.\]: \"She will not remain with the power of the arm,
nor will her seed stand, but will be delivered up to death with child,
servants, even with her lord king, by whom she had been so powerful.\"

43\) Bernice\'s brother, 1) Ptolemy Euergetes, punished and avenged such
misdeeds, fought the two brothers, Seleucum and Antiochum, chased them
away, and plundered their kingdoms, and went home again. And at last,
shortly after, these two brothers (as befits matricide) perished
miserably and wretchedly. Daniel says here \[v. 7.) that the king will
overtake the king at noon with army strength and will be victorious.

44 After Ptolemai Euergeti\'s death, the

1\) Erlanger: \"rächent Bernice Brüder.\"

In turn, the sons of the late Seleuci Callinici, namely Seleucus
Ceraunus and the great Antiochus. But Seleucus Ceraunus died in armor,
so that Antiochus had to come in haste from Babylonia and carry out the
battle against Ptolemy, Euergeti\'s son, called Ptolemy Philopator. But
Ptolemy Philopator defeated the great Antiochum with his army. This is
what Daniel says here, that the sons of Callinici would be angry and
overrun Ptolemy Philopator. But Philopator will defeat them and become
proud by such victory. For the same Philopator then committed
fornication, and finally slew his queen Euridice, who was also his
sister, for the sake of a harlot.

45 But Antiochus the Great, after Philopator\'s death, again made a
stronger stand against Philopator\'s son, named Ptolemy Epiphanes, who
was still a child, about four or five years old. And as it happens when
the lords have to have guardians, other kings, such as Philip in
Graecia, joined forces with Antiocho against him and wanted to divide
the land of the child Epiphanes. And there was also discord in the land
itself, and the Jews also fell away from him to Antiocho. Therefore
Daniel speaks here that the king Antiochus comes again, and that many
set themselves against the child Epiphanes, that \"the arms of the
south\" \[v. 15\], that is, the captains of Epiphanes, whom he had in
the land of Phoenice and Judea and at Jerusalem, could not resist, but
Antiochus won such land all. And also came to the precious land of
Jerusalem, 2) where the Jews helped him to drive out Epiphanes\'
captains completely. Antiochus honored them highly and gave them great
property and many freedoms.

46 But since he wanted to go on and win Egypt, Ptolemy Epiphanes called
the Romans. Then Antiochus had to desist, and made an agreement with
Ptolemy Epiphanes, and gave him his daughter Cleopatra, but not in good
faith, but, as Daniel says here \[v. 17\], \"that he might corrupt
him,\" for with the daughter he intended to deprive the young boy of his
kingdom. But the queen and the Egyptians came to ruin.

2\) The Weimar Bible and Freder have our reading: Erlanger: zu
Jerusalem.

914 **Grl. 41, SSS-SS8.** Interpretations on the Prophets. **W. VI.
I4SS-I4S6.** 915

47 Then he fought against the isles of Asia (as Daniel \[v. 18\] says)
and gained much of them. But the Romans met him and drove him back,
stripping him of a good skirt, almost all of Asia. After that he
returned home, and went into Persia, and wanted to get great money to
Elimaide, from a temple. But the country people were up and beat him to
death with their whole army. So he remained in foreign lands, and \"was
nowhere found\" \[v. 19\].

48 Now he had previously sent his son Antiochum, called Noble, the least
and most unimportant, to Rome as a scourge or pledge, because the Romans
had prevailed against him. When he was dead, his son Seleucus Philopator
became king. But an unfit man, as Daniel says here \[v. 20\], better
sent as a henchman or bailiff than as a king, as he did nothing princely
or righteous, died soon.

49 Then Antiochus the noble secretly escaped from Rome, and even though
he was unaware and the kingdom was not intended for him (as Daniel \[v.
21\] says), yet he came sneaking and pretended so well that he became
king with tricks. This is the last king Daniel writes about, the noble,
pious child, who does everything with trickery and deceit, with lies and
deceitfulness, not as a king, but as a loose knave. For his wiles were
rude, coarse, and impudent, that he asked for no semblance of honor, as
will follow. For the sake of this rascal and loose cousin most of all
the face happened, to comfort the Jews, whom he should plague with all
plagues.

50 As he had now treacherously overtaken the kingdom, he attacked with
the same art, and because the king in Egypt, his sister\'s son, called
Ptolemy Philometor, was still too young, he pretended that he wanted to
be a faithful guardian of his cousin, and took the cities in Syria,
Phoenice and Judea. Now that the powerful in Egypt demanded them again,
he did not want to cede \[them\]. Then the battle began, of which Daniel
says here \[v. 22.\] that, like a flood, he overwhelmed the Egyptian
armies (that is, Philometor\'s mighty and chief men), for he retained
the victory.

51 He did not stop at the deceit, but he also thought to destroy the
whole land of Egypt.

He made an agreement with Philometor\'s captains, pretending that he was
doing everything for the good of his cousin as a faithful guardian. In
this way, as Daniel says here \[v. 23\], he went into Egypt with the few
people, because they opened all the gates for his dear cousin. And he
put on the crown and made himself king in Egypt, robbed, plundered and
washed away the whole land of Egypt with such cunning (as the text says
here \[v. 24 ff.\]), which 2) until then none of his ancestors could do
with power, and went home again.

52 When King Philometor had grown up and taken the kingdom, he wanted to
take back his own by force, so the two kings armed themselves against
each other. But when the noble child Antiochus saw that Philometor
wanted to be too strong for him, he held on to his virtue, and with
money he caused Philometor\'s own people to strike at him, and thus many
were slain over it; but he did not win the country. After that he made
peace with his cousin again, ate and talked with him over tables, and
would have liked to be in Egypt one more time; but they did not believe
him; and, as Daniel says here \[v. 27\], both kings intended to destroy
each other under the appearance of peace. So he returned home with great
goods, and on the way he was also admitted to Jerusalem by trickery and
deceit; there he robbed the temple and the city shamefully; as 4 Macc.
1, 23. says, and here \[v. 28.\] Daniel also says that he will judge his
heart against the holy covenant.

After that, about two years, when his lies and tricks would no longer
help, he took upon himself to win Egypt by force, and overran his
cousin, now not as a guardian, but as an enemy. But Daniel says \[v.
29.), \"he shall not succeed as at the first.\" For the Romans, who were
the guardians and protectors of King Philometor by his father\'s will,
sent a councilor, Marcum Popilium, to him with warriors, and commanded
him to go out of Egypt. But he also wanted to use his art here, and
reject the Romans from him.

1\) flush - to rob, plunder; in the Bible (Dan. 11:24.) Luther gave it
by \"exploit.\"

2\) Erlanger: that; Freder: iä guvä.

**916 Erl. 41, 258. 294 f.** Interpretation of the Prophet Daniel, Cap.
11, 36. **W. VI, I4Ü8-1459**. **917**

with good words, pretending that he wanted to discuss the matter with
his friends. Then Marcus Popilius, with a staff in his hand, made a
circle in the sand where Antiochus stood by the sea, and said, \"This is
what the council of Rome says: Do not leave the circle, but give your
answer, whether you want war or peace. Then he had to leave in disgrace
and returned home.

54 And it came upon Jerusalem, and upon God\'s house, and upon His
service, and upon His people: for he had nowhere else to expiate his
wrath, nor to avenge his reproach, but upon God and upon His kingdom.
And many evil men of the Jews helped him, and clung to him, until God
raised up Judam Maccabaeum and his brethren against him; as all this is
shown above in chapter 8, and here Daniel tells in the text.

**Interpretation of the eleventh and twelfth chapters of Daniel. \*)**

The twelfth chapter of Daniel, as all teachers unanimously interpret it,
refers entirely under Antioch\'s name to the end of Christ and to this
last time, when we live inside. Therefore, there is no more history to
be sought here, but the bright gospel now shows and tells everyone well
who the real Antiochus is, who has exalted himself above all gods, and
\"love of women\", that is, the marriage state \"not respected\", but
forbidden, and instead filled the world with his god\'s idolatry, in
addition with carnal immorality, and divided the treasures and goods on
earth 2c. For \"love of women\" here does not mean lewd love, but must
mean the honest, chaste love of women, which God created and commanded,
namely conjugal love; because the prophet counts this as one of the most
noble vices of the end-Christ, that he does not respect the love of
women. 1)

We would have liked to see someone else take up the chapter and declare
to strengthen our faith and to awaken hope for the blessed day of our
redemption, which is now certainly at the door, as this text gives.
Since this did not happen, we want to here-

1\) This first paragraph is also found in the preface of 1530, which is
followed by the words: \"We will leave it at that. For this chapter\'s
understanding and spiritual interpretation of Antiochi goes and stands
in experience, and as he says, the resurrection of the dead and the
right redemption will soon follow from it.\" The conclusion \[of the
preface just mentioned\] agrees with the interpretation of 12 Cap. \[s
19 ff.j. (Erlangen edition.)

with others give cause to think further and better.

First of all, there are the bright words at the end of the 11th chapter,
v. 35, that after Antioch there is \"another time\", so that this
twelfth chapter cannot be understood from Antioch, because it is
supposed to be another time. And what shall happen in that other time,
the angel proclaims, saying:

Cap. 11, 36: The **king will do what he wants.**

\(4\) That is, he will not be subject to any law or doctrine, but he
himself will be the law, and what he wills must be called right. Now in
all kingdoms such a king is an unpleasant tyrant, but in the kingdom of
Christ (of which he now speaks), since one must be obedient to Christ by
faith, such a tyrant shall be basically nothing. Here the pope is
clearly depicted, shouting impudently in his filth that all churches and
thrones can be judged by him, but he can be judged by no one. And Gap.
Solitae: As the sun is above the moon, so is the pope above the emperor.
But where there is authority, there is power to command; the others are
guilty of obedience. Therefore his hypocrites boast scrinium pectoris,
that all rights are in the ark of his heart, and: Sic volo, sic jubeo,
sit pro ratione voluntas. And Gap. Si papa: If the pope seduces
innumerable souls to hell, nor shall anyone say: What doest thou? All
this is not only thus taught, but

\*) The title of the single edition of this interpretation is given in
the first note to this writing.

[918 Erl. 41, 2S5-2gs. Interpretations about the prophets. W. vi.
1459-1402. 919]{.underline}

also practiced and driven in the work. For the emperor is not emperor,
but the pope, to whom he, subject as a servant, must also kiss the feet
with all his rights. This is also what St. Peter proclaimed \[2 Ep. 3,
3\], that those would come who would live according to their own lusts
or wills. So that he explains this word of Danieli, \"what he wills.\"
On the other hand:

**He will rise up and rebel against all that is God, and against the God
of all gods he will speak abominably, and he will succeed until the
wrath is out.**

5 Thus the pope also paints himself, since he boasts in his filth that
he is over the holy scripture, and that it must be confirmed by his
chair and receive its value. But he does this much more strongly in
deed. For all who have ever spoken against him from the Scriptures, he
has cursed, condemned, burned as heretics and children of the devil, and
still does so daily. And his own still cry out now and forever that the
church (of the pope) is above the Scriptures. Here Daniel means \"to
speak abominably against the God of all gods\". And he succeeded, and
must be called right, by God\'s anger against the ungrateful world, as
St. Paul says 2 Thess. 2, 11, \"that God would send powerful errors
\"rc. For other tyrants, who persecuted God\'s word, did it out of
ignorance. This one does it knowingly, and calls 1) the holy scripture
and God\'s word, over which he wants to be master, and condemn as
devil\'s doctrine, where and when he wants. Therefore he lets himself be
called an earthly God, yes, God of all gods, Lord of all lords, King of
all kings, not a pure man, but mixed with God, or a godly man, just as
Christ himself is God and man, of which he wants to be vicar, and still
rises above it.

Thus St. Paul in 2 Thess. 2, 3. f. has led this text of Daniel: \"The
man of sins shall be revealed, and the child of perdition, which
exalteth himself, and setteth himself above and against all that is
called God, or that is honored. And sitteth in the temple of GOD, and
showeth himself to be one God.\" For above GOD\'s natural being and
majesty nothing can exalt itself, but above the named, preached, honored

1\) Freder: Zsstst in ors - leads them in the mouth.

honored GOD, that is, over GOD\'s Word and Service or Sacrament.

\(7\) For \"man of sin\" and \"child of perdition\" here means not only
one who is a sinner and lost for himself, a privatus, a personal sinner,
but one who is a publicus, that is, one who leads others with him to sin
and perdition, as heretics or tyrants lead the land and people astray
and perish with them. The Scriptures describe King Jeroboam as having
taught Israel to sin, or made them sin with his new worship \[1 Kings
12:30\].

8 The pope has practiced this ministry of sin in two ways. First, he
established many new religious services, as follows in his Mausim, such
as indulgences, holy water, saints\' service, pilgrimages, brotherhoods,
monasticism, mass, fasting, celebrations, 2c., besides disturbing and
desecrating the true religious services, as God\'s word, faith,
sacrament, 2c. Secondly, that he oppressed the Christians with
innumerable laws, and thus created sin, since God does not want any, and
in sum, he smeared sin on almost all of God\'s creatures, namely, where
and when he wanted, butter, eggs, cheese, milk, and meat to be eaten
must be sin, which God gave us to enjoy freely, purely, and without sin.
So he has also besmirched the time and days with sins. For wherever and
whenever he willed, one had to fast and celebrate, and at the same time
eat all kinds of food, even the dear bread, and drink must be sin.

\(9\) So he also polluted the place and utensils with sins, for he
sanctified the churches and consecrated places so that neither stone nor
wood could be touched, especially the altars and altar utensils. It was
terrible if a layman touched the chalice, paten or corporal with his
bare hand. If it was to be washed, no holy nun was allowed to wash it,
the priest had to wash it first: so full of laws and sin were the
chalice, paten, corporal, and everything that was consecrated. So the
wedding, freely instituted by God, had to be sinful, where it was held
in conjoined time. Also, the marriage bed had to be caught in sins,
which time he wanted.

[920 Eri. 41, \[ss-soo. Interpretation of the prophet Daniel, cap. 11,
36. 37. W. vi. 14S2-14W. 921]{.underline}

\(10\) So he also defiles the bodies of the priests. For the natural
growth, and God\'s creatures, the poor hair on the head had to be sin,
plates they had to wear and shave off the beard, so they were holy. And
summa, all Christians\' body and life had to be called unholy, his
consecrated ones alone were holy. I will remain silent, how easily a
layman could take offense at a consecrated person, place or device 2c.

\(11\) So he also defiles the garments. For whichever monk or nun did
not wear their caps and peculiar shape and color garments, he was a
sinner and lost; so also the priests with their garments.

\(12\) Thus he has besmirched with sins almost every creature\'s custom,
food, drink, clothing, place, time, body and life. And if he had reigned
longer, perhaps he would also have forbidden coughing, clearing of the
throat, snotting, and letting the wind off the body. As if he had to
plague Christendom with laws, prohibitions, sins and destruction through
all creatures\' customs, and then buy money from it with dispensations
2c. And such sins and abominations must be called holiness and special
worship, like the calves of Jeroboam. Such sins and abominations are
what St. Paul means in this saying.

\(13\) This is what Daniel says: \"He set himself against and above the
God of all gods. For God also gave laws through Moses, and burdened the
Jews with many sins, since otherwise no sin would have been natural; but
he was God, and had power over them. This devil-headed and foul-mouthed
monkey of God wants to imitate him, and does it far beyond, in addition
also against the right God, whom he destroys his worship, and with so
innumerable laws, that he has no power, causes innumerable sins through
all creatures custom through all the world, and shows himself hereby, as
if he were God in the temple of God, that is, in Christendom. All this
is proven by his filth and filthy vials.

By these two pieces the pope has now devastated the 1) two hierarchies.
Through

1\) \"the\" is missing in the Erlanger.

The first, the secular law, obedience and authority trampled under him,
and, where he wanted, have dissolved, and devastated. He deposed,
cursed, and corrupted emperors, kings, and princes, banished subjects
and children from obedience, and, in sum, made everything he wanted or
lusted for subject to neither law nor order. By the other, he has
disturbed the churches, thrown the Holy Scriptures under himself, torn
apart and devastated the sacraments and their rites, suppressed the
Gospel until it was no longer known, and thus brought both God\'s word
and God\'s service to nothing. Thirdly:

Cap. 11, 37. **He will not respect the God of his fathers; he will not
respect the love of women, nor some things of God \[, because he will
rebel against everything\].**

\(15\) Here he brings back what was said about God, that he should do
more. When he is told about the God of his fathers, that is, about
Christ, whom the apostles, his forefathers, preached, he is now so
firmly established about the God of all gods that he does not respect
it, nor does he want to know anything about it, but rather, proudly,
stubbornly and stubbornly kills all those who speak about Christ.

16\. And so that he leaves nothing undefiled, he will also tear apart
the third hierarchy of God, namely the marriage state, which he has not
only forbidden to the clergy, but has also thoroughly blasphemed,
desecrated, despised and destroyed by calling it an unclean, carnal,
ungodly being, in which one cannot serve God; regardless of the fact
that God has blessed the marriage state, has declared His covenant and
good pleasure, and through the forgiveness of sin has pronounced the
marriage bed pure and honest, and does not want to count the evil lust
of the flesh in it 2). So the end-Christ must curse what God blesses;
tear apart what God binds together; desecrate what God praises, summa,
do everything about and against God, desolate and destroy. He will not
forbid such marriages out of love for chastity, not for appearance
alone, but so that he may do freely and unhindered what he wills, and
never-

2\) The Erlanger (also the Weimar Bible) has resolved \"rechen\" by:
rächen, while it should be rendered by \"rechnen\". Freder: rsxutars.

[\
922 **Ext. 41, soo-302.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI.
1\^5-1487.** 923]{.underline}

The Lord said that the subject must not bear the sweat of the nose and
other toil and labor that God has placed on the three of His
institutions, the church, the dominion, and the marriage state, but may
live freely of his will, in all pleasure, peace, security, leisure,
honor, and power. For preaching, teaching, serving the churches has much
trouble, driving, and unpleasure; likewise the regiments, which are
established and connected in law; the marriage state also, with worries,
work, driving, wife, children, mind, house, and farm. So also St. Paul
says in 1 Tim. 4, 2. 3. that the prohibitors of marriage speak lies in
hypocrisy, for they do not mean chastity, but rather their saintly,
gentle, quiet, self-willed life, just as the monks also do not flee the
world for the sake of holiness, but that they may have rest, peace and a
good chamber from the world.

17\) That Daniel says, \"he will speak abominably against the God of all
gods\"; item, \"he will respect no god\", as if Daniel held more than
one God, is to be understood that the Scriptures call the saints, yes,
even the worldly lords gods, Ps. 82, 6. Jn. 10, 34. and be the opinion
that the pope will respect neither the highest God, nor those whom he
has set as gods, that is, neither the holy church nor worldly rule. This
is one piece of the Pabst\'s or End Christ\'s nature and legends, so
Daniel describes how he would tear apart, destroy and devastate
everything that God ordered. The other piece is what the end-Christ,
Pabst, will build, cause and do against it, and speaks:

Cap. ii, 38. **But in the same place he will honor his own god Mausim;
for he will honor a god of which his fathers knew nothing, with gold,
silver, precious stones and jewels 2c.**

18 The word \"Mausim\" has remained uninterpreted until now; we will
dare to see if God would have us meet it. Maos actually means a strength
or stronghold, as castles are called strong and strongholds 1) and in
the Psalter God often calls our Maos, strength or stronghold. And we
understand first of all by it the stone houses,

1\) Erlanger: feste. Weimar Bible: Feste; Freder: mun1tion68.

The churches and the things that belong to them are called churches,
because they are built exquisitely, firmly and splendidly above other
houses, like castles. These are the monasteries and convents in all the
world, which are not built in honor of God or Christ or for His service,
for \"He does not dwell in houses made with hands,\" says St. Stephen
Apost. 7, 48, but to the pope. For in them he reigns and plays with his
holy water, masses, vigils, indulgences, purgatory, and the innumerable
vermin, but inside he collects money, silver, precious stones and jewels
from all over the world, as well as all the strength and power of his
divinity; for in them they teach and live according to his will and
commandments. And he has also fortified it most gloriously and mightily,
without armor and defense, only with bulls, letters and seals, as a
magician or juggler.

19 And especially the monasteries and convents serve the pope; for in
the parishes one has served God a little, with baptisms, sacraments and
preaching. But it has not been pure, and even today the monasteries and
convents are despised. But in the monasteries and convents it went on
with all power day and night. They do not have preaching houses, but
rather chapel houses, houses for the dead, that is, vigil houses, where
more is read, talked about, and done for the dead than for the living;
item, hearing houses, crying houses, but also gold houses, silver
houses, and jewel houses.

20 And especially the angel touches with the word \"Mausim\" the
greatest and highest piece, the worst church abomination in the papacy,
the mass; he would like to say clearly, his God of the mass, and acts as
if he would willingly hide the word \"mass\" in speech, so that he
cannot call it a mass because of great displeasure, but speaks
\"Mausim\".

\(21\) For what are the monasteries and convents but missals? They are
built for the sake of the mass, as for the daily, most holy sacrifice.
For the sake of the mass, everything is given to it. For the sake of the
mass, all ceremonies are conceived. For the sake of the mass, schools
were held, and students studied for the sake of the mass, so that they
could become mass priests. And all church ceremonies are attached to the
mass and around the mass, like rats to their king, so that where the
mass is in the church

924 **Erl- 41, sos-305.** interpretation of the prophet Daniel, cap. 11,
38-40. **W. VI, 14677-1470.** 925

is not (as at the time of the interdict), there the poor church stands
as if it were not a church but a desolate stone house. Such an immense
amount of money and expense has gone to the mass. No one thought about
the word and preaching, nor studied it, or even counted it little
compared to the mass, when the word and preaching should be the most
important thing, and almost everything.

22\) What then is the Pabst\'s church God, Mass God, or God Mausim? It
is not a god, and cannot be a god. For one does not serve the one, true
God with the mass, but thereby blasphemes and desecrates our Lord Jesus
Christ (that is, God the Father Himself) in the most dreadful and
horrible way, as faith is thereby destroyed, and work sanctity is set up
in His place. But \[he is called God,\] 1) because Scripture allows that
idols are also called gods, and a god is nothing other than that on
which the human heart relies, trusts, believes, hopes and loves. Now if
the confidence is right, then the God is also right; if the confidence
is wrong, then the God is also nothing.

Therefore, the God of Mausim is nothing other than a false conceit and
confidence of the pope and his followers, that the mass and church
system or pews are such a great service, such a great work, such a great
sacrifice, of which there is no equal, nor can there be. They allow
themselves to be comforted by this conceit, as if it were the true God
Himself, and they insist that God is thus minded, as this conceit fools
them. Then the devil helps to strengthen and drive them, and with that
he gathers all the world\'s money and goods to himself, and finally the
hellish fire in the middle of hell. From this it is easy to understand
what follows:

Cap. 11, 39. **And he will do great honor to those who help him
strengthen Mausim, with the foreign god whom he has chosen, and will
make them lords over great possessions, and will distribute the land as
a reward.**

24 In German, Daniel would almost say: \"The pope does thus: all who
help him to strengthen and increase his church system, his own holiness,
worship and mass, he will make them great, rich cardinals, bishops,
abbots, provosts, curtisans, canons, priests, monks, and so on.

1\) Added by us.

and raise them high, bless them, free them over and against the laity,
and thus divide the goods and land of the churches among them for their
reward. For this purpose, the kingdom of heaven is promised to them
alone, from whom the other Christians must buy it with gold, silver and
jewels, to honor and increase his God of the Mass and God of the church;
this is the Pope\'s legend of Daniel briefly, but in the right words,
depicted, as it has been and is in the swing of his right powers.

\(25\) Then follows how the papacy is to fall and perish. And these are
very secret and sealed sayings, which are difficult to make before they
are fulfilled. Just as all prophecies are hidden from the devil himself
before they are fulfilled. As God says to Moses \[Ex. 33:20\]: \"My face
thou canst not see\", my back or rear thou shalt see, that is, when I
have gone, and have done it, then thou canst look after me; but toward
the front, where I want to go, no living man can see. To make matters
worse, we want to give others something to think about, because we think
that the fall of the pope has begun.

Because the angel himself says more than once to Daniel that these are
to be secret and sealed speeches, we cannot understand the king at noon,
Ptolemy (as above, v. 5.), as little as the king at midnight, the king
Antiochum, which time above at the end of the 11th chapter, v. 35.Since
we have to understand the king at midnight (because the whole chapter is
understood by all to refer to the end of Christ) as the pope, it is
obvious that his counterpart, that is, the right spiritual king at
midday, must be the king of holy Christendom, Christ, against whom the
pope is an antichrist, as Antiochus was against Ptolemy Egypt. For now I
leave it in order to lead much scripture, that noon in the scripture
means good, and middle-eight means evil, because it is evident. Thus he
speaks now:

Cap. 11, 40. **In the end, the king will join him at noon.**

27 This is when the wrath of God is almost ready to end, and the pope
also now

**926 Erl. 41, 305-307.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI,
1470-1473. 927**

When he comes to the end of his life, Christ will give him a push,
awakening some devout Christians who begin to cry out against him. But
he will not fall yet, it will only be a push to the beginning.

This attack (methinks) was started by Emperor Louis, Duke of Bavaria,
since Pope Clement V and John XXII boasted that he 1) would be emperor
after the death of Emperor Henry of Lützelburg, 2) as his extravagant
fooled, and put the fine, pious Emperor Louis under ban innocently. And
the disgraceful lie writers, the whales, are so grudged against him that
they do not count him among the emperors, nor do they call him emperor,
but to their disgrace Bavarum, the Bavarian. Although the popes banished
and plagued the emperors before, as Henricum IV and V, Fridericum I and
II 2c, and some wrote against the pope, the papacy has never declined as
it did after Emperor Louis. He also had learned people with him, as
Occam, Bonagratia 2c., who honestly turned away the Pope John. There are
also still sharp books against the pope, for Emperor Louis. And he
himself, regardless of the pope\'s ban, went to Rome and appointed
another pope, and remained emperor.

29 Soon after followed the great schism or rift, when three popes ruled
against each other at the same time for thirty-nine years (as a sign
that his end must be near and should be torn apart). Thus the pope with
his Roman chair had not been in Rome but in France for several years
before, was placed there by Clement V, and remained there for
seventy-four years.

But this thrust was the praeludium, prelude, and Christ tuned with it to
the right thrust, which St. John Hus gave to the pope, and was burned
over it. This thrust rose above the indulgence in St. Peter\'s churches
in Rome, however, as it rose with Luther. For the popes at that time,
from the beginning of Bonifacius VII, the fundamental priest who first
teased and seduced the world with the golden year, played wonders and
all mischievousness with the indulgence, so that Clement VI also had a
bull

1\) namely \"the pope\".

2\) Lützelburg - Luxembourg.

In it, he commanded the angels in heaven (as one God, not only on earth,
but also in heaven) to bring the souls of those who ran to Rome after
the indulgence, and who were different on the way, from mouth to mouth
to paradise to eternal joys. He also commanded the hell or the devil
about the same souls with such words: We do not want it badly, that the
hellish chastisement should be put on them. Thus the accursed
abomination had not only set itself in the temple of God here on earth,
but also in heaven over the angels, over heaven, over paradise, over
hell 2c. Some years later, when indulgences were so blasphemously
preached in Bohemia, John Hus opposed them, and especially attacked this
Clementine, diabolical bull, and punished the vices of the popes. And
this was the thrust that he taught: If the pope were not holy, he would
not be a member of the holy church, that is, if the pope were a
prankster, he would not be a pious man. This was the great heresy,
therefore he had to be burned; also that the pope was the head of the
churches, not jure divino, sed humano.

Nevertheless, the blow has given two insurmountable wounds to the
papacy. The first one was that the popes were expelled from heaven and
the pipes had to be retracted; no longer were such bulls and
commandments allowed to go out over the angels. And God soon began to
punish the same pride and iniquity. The other, that after St. John Hus,
the papacy came into great contempt, and St. John Hus\' name and
doctrine could not with any power be resisted nor brought to ruin; until
at that time the cry frightened him that John Hus had been a forerunner,
as he proclaimed to them in the Spirit, saying: \"For over a hundred
years you shall answer to God and to me. Item: They will roast a goose
(Hus means goose), a swan will come after me, they will not roast him.
And so it happened: he was burned in 1416. So this present quarrel began
with the indulgence in 1517.

32 He still resisted this attack with all his might, and remained
seated, condemned Hussein\'s teaching, and burned him, and many with
him, and after him much blood.

928 **Erl. 41, S07-30S.** Interpretation of the Prophet Daniel, cap. II,
40. 41. **W. VI. 1473-1475.** 929

Germans and Bohemians against each other, caused all murder and misery,
to elevate his chair. But since the time of the Concilii they have been
safe, practiced all kinds of mischief with ecclesiastical benefices and
simony. In addition, they gave themselves up to all kinds of public
vices, became vain epicures and swine, until the world was tired of them
and became weary of them because of their shameful life. Now the angel
continues to speak about this:

Cap. 11, 40: **The king will rage against him at midnight, and with
chariots, horses and many ships he will fall, flood and pass through the
countries.**

He compares the pope to a king who wields great armor with rage (as
Antiochus did). And although the kings and lords of Christendom have
also helped the pope physically with their power (that is, they have
suppressed the heretics, the saints of Christ, who have pushed him, in
all countries), the angel means the spiritual armor, that is, the ban,
the censures, and other censures of the pope, The angel means the
spiritual armor, i.e., the ban, the bulls and other censures of the
pope, in which the clergy served him with their ships, horses, chariots,
i.e., by writings, books, sermons, so that they fell into the countries,
passed through, and flooded everything like a flood in the most violent
way. For the war and armor of Christ and the pope, his abominable one,
actually goes on with teachings and writings.

Cap. 11, 41. **He will also come into the precious land, and many will
fall.**

That is, with his clergy and armor he will not only bring the common
multitude under him, who do not stand firm in the faith, but also the
true Christians, who previously stood with and helped the heretics, or
approved of them, will also be deterred and cut down, when they see that
he is victorious, and his pushers, the heretics, fall so mightily, and
the truth is publicly suppressed. For the ships and chariots, that is,
the scribes and criers, are too many, and all the corners are full. So
the pope has been pushed, but he is not yet lying down.

**But these shall be delivered out of his hand, Edom, Moab, and the
firstfruits of the children of Ammon.**

35 As in this chapter the king at noon and at midnight are no longer
Ptolemy and Antiochus, so Edom, Moab, Ammon are no longer the nations
that existed before, for they have also long since been physically
changed, Saracens and Turks. Therefore we must look at the
interpretation of the names, as we have done with the names \"Midday\"
and \"Midnight\". The pope will not cut down or deceive three kinds of
people; they will remain and be the holy Christian church under the
destroyer, the end Christ; for the holy church must remain until the end
of the world.

The first ones are Edomites. \"Edom\" means red-colored. The red-colored
ones are the holy martyrs who have constantly let themselves be
strangled, drowned, burned by the pope, bishops, doctors, especially by
the bloodhounds of the Order of Preachers (who have martyred a lot) all
over the world, until this day. This is a big pile.

The others are Moabites. \"Moab\" means from the father or paternal,
paternus\]. These are those who remained in the world from time to time
and did not fall from their father, Christ, even though they had not
been public preachers. And especially those who finally relied on
Christ\'s death, and did not die on Pabst\'s Mausim, nor on his letters
of indulgence. I have seen several of these myself, and heard of many
more, from 1) monks and all kinds of classes. Just as St. Bernard did,
when he thought his hour had come, he forgot his order and everything of
the pope\'s mausim, and delivered himself into Christ\'s suffering with
these words: Christ has the kingdom of heaven by twofold right; first,
inherited from the Father, as the only, eternal Son. The right remains
to him alone. Secondly, as earned through his suffering. This right and
merit he gave us, because he suffered for our sake. To these Bernards
and Moabites or paternal Christians God has reserved much, as in the
time of Elijah the seven thousand of the people of Israel \[1 Kings
19:18\].

38\. the third, principium filiorum Am- mon, that is, the firstfruits of
the children among the people. Moab and Ammon were brothers; so they
want to be

1\) Erlanger: \"also\" instead of: from. Our reading is found in the
Weimar Bible and Freder.

930\<m . 41, zvs-312. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1475-1478.
931

these Ammonites become brothers of the paternal, fraterni. These I
understand to be the young, innocent bunch, born again out of baptism,
which goes along before it recognizes or respects the pope\'s Mausim,
can neither strengthen nor weaken it, as the Edomites and Moabites do.
Therefore they are called the firstfruits and children of the people,
that is, in the people of God, in the church, recently born through
baptism. The end Christ had to leave them unfallen and unconverted.
These are the three orders of the saints: Martyrs, confessores,
virgines\...

\(39\) Against these three peoples the angel sets other three nations
that the end Christ will plunder, Egypt, Libya, the Moors. These three
are neighbors and live next to each other, just as Edom, Moab and Ammon
did before. Antiochus never ruled over all of them, nor did the pope.
Therefore we must interpret the countries differently and spiritually
until someone else does it better. Thus we divide the people of Pabst
into three parts.

40 Let Egypt be the highest, the noblest, the rich, the great, the
kings, the princes, the lords, who have the goods and the power of the
world, and who want to be quite pious. For Egypt has always been a fine,
glorious kingdom among others.

41\. libya, their neighbors, let be the neighbors afterward, the
mediocre, as citizens, scholars, and whoever is or can be something.

The Moors are the riffraff, peasants, farmhands, and what is black and
sinister, that is, unpromoted, lowly, of no repute.

\(43\) He is not satisfied with these, that he hath devoured them by his
mice, and seduced them in body and soul; he must also enter into their
bags and chests (saith the angel), and seek to have dominion over their
treasures, gold, silver, and precious things, that is, over their goods,
that he may clear them all up. This is what he does (says he):

Cap. 11, 42. **He sends his hand out into the lands, and Egypt will not
escape him.**

44 Here are the legals a latere, the cardinals and messengers, so he
sends to the kings and lords, yes, even well into the countries.

1\) fairly - to some extent.

He sets and plots to catch and fool the kings, so that they serve him
with body and goods, get for him, give him land and cities and great
gifts, and then visit them with bulls, indulgences, letters of
confession, as he sells them grace, freedom, wives, eggs, butter, milk,
meat, home fairs, sin, purgatory, hell and heaven, the Turks, God and
the devil, himself also (who can tell the fair to all), steals, and
steals by force as a lord; takes the money and treasures, and wipes his
mouth as if he had done well. The pope was particularly careful to
practice this with the indulgences and letters after he was struck, so
that he would sit down all the stronger and firmer.

45 From this text comes the common saying among Christians that the end
Christ should lift up the treasures of the earth. I mean, he found them
and lifted them up until the world does not have half of its goods. This
and all the rest must be further crossed out by the rhetorica, so one
can see what an abomination the pope is; I now sketch it a little to
understand the Daniel. Follows further:

Cap. 11, 44. **And a shout shall terrify him from the morning and from
the north \[and he shall go forth with great fury, willing to destroy
and perish many\].**

\(46\) Here it (praise be to God) will once become very bad with the
priest; for the blows have not been able to fell him, although they
knocked and admonished him to repentance; but it has been lost and in
vain. But now there comes over him no armor, no army, no people of war,
no thrusting, but a voice or a cry; at this he is terrified and falls to
the ground. O thou wondrous God in thy works! This abomination, which
hath trampled all kings under foot, and hath overpowered GOD Himself,
must despair and fall before a poor voice. How hast thou stood terrible,
great power on such loose ground, that thou art blown over by a breath!
Such words of Daniel transfigured St. Paul \[2 Thess. 2, 8.\] thus:
\"The Lord JEsus will kill him with the breath of his mouth.\"

47\. This is now the 2) last and our time,

2\) Erlanger: this one. The Weimar Bible and Freder have our reading.

932 - **Erl. 3IS-3I4.** interpretation of the prophet Daniel, Cap. 11,
44. 45. **W. VI, I478-I48I.** 933

The gospel has sounded, and the pope is crying out in despair, not
knowing what to do or how to act. He cannot and will not suffer a
concilium, he will not let it be acted upon or spoken of anywhere in the
light; only he thinks to muffle the clamor by force. He shows great
fury, says Daniel, through his armor, through his clergy, through
legates, through bulls, writings and many evil books, wants to destroy
and kill many things, incites emperors, kings, all devils, and all evil
men, and whatever he can stir up. There is no lack of will, one would
like to do it. But his end has come, no one can help him, says Daniel.
The cry is too powerful; for the pope will not return to his former
state, his own will not suffer it now, as Revelation 18:4 ff. says, and
must therefore be broken without hand and sword stroke, Dan. 8:25, like
his model, Antiochus.

48 But that such a cry is heard from morning and from midnight is
because such a gospel comes from above, from the right morning or from
the right exit. For no one can truthfully say nor boast that from his
head, or premeditated counsel, or will, such teaching has come forth. We
all came to it by chance and by accident. And it has happened to us, as
Isaiah \[Cap. 65, 1.\] says: \"I am found of them that sought me not,
and appeared unto them that asked not after me.\" For I too, who am one
of the first, sought and thought a great deal of something else in the
beginning of my writing, namely, only the abuse of indulgences, not the
indulgences themselves, much less the pope, or a hair on the pope,
understood neither Christ nor the pope rightly. But such a cry has also
come from midnight (he says), that is, from the pope\'s own realm. For
we ourselves were also papists and end-Christians at that time, much
more vehement neither they were. Follows:

Cap. 11, 45. **He planted the huts of his palace between two seas, on
the precious, holy mountain.**

Jerusalem lies between the great sea and the dead sea. Rather, Rome lies
between two great seas, the Tyrrhenian and the Adriatic. And Rome can be
called a holy mountain, because there lie many hundred thousand martyrs,
in the beginning there was also the finest church, and great things
happened there until the devil sat down there. If someone wanted to
interpret all this spiritually, that the Pope has sat down as a god on
the holy mountain, that is, in holy Christendom, and planted his kingdom
with his filthy and abominable teachings. For Christ means to teach
\"planting\", Matth. 15, 13: \"All plants, which my heavenly Father does
not plant, they are cut off.

**Between two seas.**

This may be understood by the church, that this holy mountain lies
between two seas; that is, Christianity lives between this world\'s life
and hell, that the dead sea is that world, where the wicked are lost to
the bottom, the living great sea is this world. But Christianity does
not live in the world, nor does it die there, but goes between the two,
and lives in faith and in the spirit of Christ. But where the two seas
are to be understood from the pabst\'s chair or seat, not from the holy
mountain, this is the opinion that the pabst rules over the living and
the dead with his plants or filth. For with his mausim he helps all the
living in the world, and all the dead in purgatory.

51 He calls it \"planted\", because the pope has made a paradise of all
pleasure in Rome or in the church, since he needs all the world\'s
goods, power and honor freely according to his will.

1\) This \"there\" Freder translates: xost dano vitam \-\-\--after this
life.

934 **Erl. 41, 314-316.** interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1481-1484.. . 935

**\[The twelfth chapter.\]**

Cap. 12, 1. **At the same time the great prince Michael will arise, who
stands for the children of your people. For there shall be such a time
of trouble, as it hath not been since men were, until this time.**

1 Although Michael is an angel\'s name, we understand here, as also
Revelation 12:7, the Lord Christ Himself, who on earth with His angels,
that is, preachers, fights against the devil through the gospel. For he
calls him \"the great prince\". He has now risen up and stands for the
Christians, comforting them with the word of grace. For until then, the
most horrible time has been on earth, as Christ also says in Matth. 24,
22: \"And if these days had not been shortened\" and ended, \"no man
would have been saved,\" not even the Edomites, Moabites and Ammonites.
For it has already begun in Welschland, Rome and other places, that
epicurians have made a mockery of the faith and no longer baptize their
children. Thus, both tariffs, sacrament and word, everything would have
ended, and no man would have been saved.

\(2\) For he does not mean here bodily tribulations, which were much
greater in the destruction of Jerusalem, Rome, and many other countries
and cities, but of souls, or spiritual tribulations of the church,
through Christ\'s suffering. For bodily afflictions are temporal,
ceasing with the body. But here it applies that the church perishes or
remains, which the devil had attacked through the end-Christ in two
ways; on the one hand through epicuric contempt of the sacraments and
word of God; On the other hand, through fear and despair of conscience,
since no real consolation of grace, but rather vain miserable torments
through their own sufficiency and works afflicted the Christians (of
which the Epicureans and pagans know nothing), so that here it was time
for Michael to wake up, and not let Christianity perish in the last
stages, but to comfort and gather it again through his salvific word of
grace. Follows:

**V. 2. 3. and many who sleep in the earth will awake, some to eternal
life, some to eternal shame and disgrace. But the teachers shall shine
as the brightness of heaven, and they that teach righteousness as the
stars for ever and ever.**

The angel hastens to the last day; therefore, though he has more to say
about Michael\'s ministry, he goes out to the end of the world and
speaks of the resurrection of the dead. But soon he returns again, and
says of the teachers and preachers how they should shine like the
brightness of the sky and stars, and convert many before the dead rise.
As in Dan. 9, 26, he tells how the city should be destroyed before he
describes the last week, which had to happen before. But some understand
this shining of the teachers in that life, like 1 Cor. 15, 41. This is
also true, but we take it here for the need and service of the afflicted
church.

**Much** (he speaks) **will wake up.**

4 For at the last day we shall not all rise again, as St. Paul says 1
Cor. 15:51: For they that are found alive in the day shall neither die
nor rise again, but shall be changed in a moment, and taken up into the
air to meet Christ. But much, that is, the greatest multitude will be of
the dead or sleeping. So that Christ is (as faith says) judge of the
living and the dead. And here we see that after this time, as the pope
reveals, there is nothing to hope for nor to wait for but the end of the
world and the resurrection of the dead. Here the scripture is finished,
and all prophecy has an end.

**V. 4. And you, Daniel, hide this speech and seal this book until the
last time. Many will come over it and find great understanding.**

5 Here the angel clearly says that this book of Daniel shall remain
sealed, yet not forever, but until the last time, when it shall be
opened, and great understanding shall be taken out of it.

936 **Erl. 41, 316-318.** interpretation of the prophet Daniel, Cap. 12,
4-10. **W. VI, 1484-1486.** 937

We are working on it now, as said above \[Cap. 11, § 25), that the
prophecies cannot be understood thoroughly until they are completed.
After that, when it is done, they testify to the work, just as Christ,
Luc. 24, 27, after his death, first opened their minds to understand the
Scriptures. And before that he said, \"These things I say unto you,
that, when it is done, ye may believe\" 2c.

**V. 5 And I Daniel looked, and behold, there stood two others, one on
this bank of the water, and the other on that bank.**

\(6\) Of these two he says nothing more about what they are, speak or
do, unless they are \"others,\" that is, not the angel who speaks with
him. Perhaps it is the two angels, one of the Persians, the other the
prince of the Greeks, of which he says above Cap. 10, 13, who hinder the
people of Israel with the kings. They stand and remain such hinderers
with the kings until the end of the world; one toward the morning, the
other toward the evening, so that God\'s word and His church do not have
vain happiness, but as He Himself subsequently interprets and speaks:

V. 10. **Many will be purified, cleansed and proved, and the ungodly
will lead ungodly lives, and no ungodly person will respect it. But the
wise will respect it.**

7 For however bright and mighty the gospel goes, and however strong the
church is, yet there must be heretics and false teachers practicing it,
that the approved may be made manifest; and these same heretics gladly
take hold of kings and great lords. So heretics remain until the end.

**V. 6. 1) And he said to the man clothed in linen standing on the
water, \"When will there be an end to abominations?**

8\. the man in linen clothes is the angel (Gabriel) who has spoken until
now, as above Cap. 10, 1. but who speaks to him: \"When will it\" 2c. is
not mentioned. But there is a voice and lamentation in the person of the

1\) Erlanger: \"it\" (namely the voice in the person of the church),
which seems to us to be the correct reading. In other editions: \"he\".
From the Latin this cannot be decided.

Church that says: Help God! Is it not enough that the end-Christ has
corrupted the church so horribly and almost to the ground? Now that it
has hardly been revived by Michael, the heretics, red spirits,
Sacramentans, and Anabaptists are coming, and they are also committing
abominations; when will it ever stop? Moreover, avarice and mammon are
so entrenched that it is to be feared that the gospel will be starved
out and respected as Lot respected Sodom and Noah before the flood. For
in the world now, both upper and lower men will neither hear nor see
anything but avarice, usury and their own will, that the time has come,
of which Lyra and others all say that after the end of Christ\'s fall,
the world will live freely and say: there is no more God.

\(9\) Here the angel makes an oath, and speaks with great earnestness,
that we should not be terrified nor become stupid before the heretics
and the priests, saying:

**V. 7: It shall be for a time, two times, and half a time, and when the
dispersion of the holy people is ended, all these things shall be
done.**

\(10\) Daniel hears this and does not understand it; he asks for
understanding. But he is told, \"It shall remain sealed until the last
time, when he shall stand in his part, that is, his book shall serve the
church according to his gift. But he shall rest, and his book shall
remain uncomprehended.

\(11\) When this time, two times, half a time will be over, and when the
heretics will stop scattering and dividing the church, we cannot know,
but we will see how the church, a poor little group, remains united in
the word, and the heretics with the world all become full, weary and
epicurious, so that no one accepts the Scriptures anymore. It seems as
if they do not value the Scriptures and God\'s Word, so that they should
become heretics or Christians. Thus it ends, as Christ says \[Luc. 18,
8\]: \"When the Son of Man comes, do you think that he will also find
faith on earth? So the church must still become small, and everything
must become vain avarice, usury, belly, food and flesh, as before the
flood of sin.

938 **Srl. 41, 318-321.** interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI.
1486-1489.** 939

**V.11. 12. And from the time that the daily sacrifice is finished, and
an abomination of desolation is made, find a thousand two hundred and
ninety days. Blessed is he that waiteth, and reacheth a thousand three
hundred and thirty and five days.**

If these were human, ordinary days, the angel spoke of the last week, in
which means the daily sacrifice ceases by the apostle Concilium, Apost.
15, 6. and the emperor Caligula puts his abomination in the temple. Thus
the 1290 days make almost the remaining half of the last week, namely
four and a half years. After the same, the gospel also went to the
Gentiles through St. Paul and Barnabam, Apost. 13, 46. 13, 46. And so
the angel would make a lid over his speech with these words, and
entangle it, so that he would run back again into the time of the
seventh week, after he had spoken of the future time, until the end of
the world.

But if they are angelic days, that is, a day is a year, as above Cap. 9,
24, then the 1290 days run until the fourteenth year of the Emperor
Louis, who was banished by the Pope, and the 1335 days until the
twenty-third year of Caroli IV, almost seven years before the schism of
the three popes, or forty-two years before the Costnitz Concilio.

14 But I would gladly interpret the daily sacrifice in a spiritual way,
that it is the holy gospel, which must remain until the end of the
world, together with the faith and the church. But nevertheless it can
happen that the world will become so epicuric that in all the world
there will be no public preaching stand, and the public speech will be
full of epicuric abominations, and the gospel will be heard only in
houses through the house fathers; and this will be the time between the
words of Christ on the cross: 1) Consummatum est, unb: Pater, in manus
tuas commendo spiritum meum. For just as Christ lived a little after
such a consummatum, so also the church can remain a little after the
public silence of the gospel. And just as the daily sacrifice of the
Jews was completed in the seventh week by the Apostles\' Concilium, and
still

1\) Freder has also set ku.it here.

The gospel that remained until the destruction of Jerusalem was also
kept by the apostles themselves where they wanted (but without need), so
the gospel can also lie publicly and be silent on the preaching
platform, and yet be preserved by devout Christians in homes.

15\) But such affliction shall not last longer than 1290 days, that is,
four and a half years; for without public preaching faith cannot stand
long, because at this time also in one year the world becomes more evil.
The last 1335 days will even finally be 2) evil, so that even in houses
there will be little faith. Therefore he says: Blessed is he who endures
until that day. As if he should say, as Christ says \[Luc. 18, 8.\]:
\"When the Son of Man comes, do you think he will find faith on earth?\"

16\) Almost all teachers have spoken of these four and a half years, and
all books are full of them, without pointing to the reign of the end of
Christ, which, according to the order of the text, Daniel does not
suffer, who continues to prophesy what will happen after the fall of the
end of Christ, and sets these four and a half years after Michael, and
after the oath of the angel on the water.

17 And although this interpretation seems as if one should be sure of
the last day, which day or year it should come, which Christ is denying
to know, Apost. 1, 7. and in the Gospel \[Marc. 13, 32.\], it is far
from the truth. First of all, if the sacrifice of the gospel is publicly
performed, no one will be able to remember the year or the day when it
begins, since all sacrifices cannot stop on one day. On the other hand,
even if one already knows when it should begin, the 1335 days are set
above the 1290, which no one would notice in all the world. And summa, I
think that these 1335 days will not be understood publicly in general,
they are then fulfilled on the last day. Unless God were to raise up a
Noah, for example, who could reckon up these same days and certainly
meet them.

18 But I, for my part, am content that the last day must be at the door,
for the signs which Christ proclaims

2\) \"even finite\" - to the highest. Freder: sum msli.

[**940-** Eri. 4i, \[Li-323. interpretation of the prophet Daniel, Cap.
12, 11. 12. W. vi, i4ss-i4S2. **941**]{.underline}

and the apostles Peter and Paul, are now almost all done, and the trees
shoot forth, and the Scriptures green and blossom. Whether we cannot
know the day so evenly is not in it; another make it better; it is
certainly all in the end.

19\. 1) From this we see what an excellent, great man Daniel was, both
before God and the world. First of all, before God, that he had such a
special prophecy, above all other prophets, namely, that he not only
prophesied about Christ, like the others, but also counted the time and
years, agreed on them and made them certain, and that the kingdoms, up
to that appointed time of Christ, sat in order, with their commerce and
change, in such a fine and even way that the future of Christ could not
be lacking, if one wanted to do it deliberately, like the Jews; and
henceforth, until the last day, the state and nature of the Roman Empire
and the course of the world will also be properly represented, so that
even the last day will not be lacking or have to fall unawares, let it
be done willfully, as our Epicureans are doing now.

20 Therefore methinks. St. Peter especially meant Daniel, when he says 1
Petr. 1, 11: \"The prophets have searched to which and what time the
Spirit of Christ points\" 2c. \"Which\" means that he certainly reckons
the time, and agrees how long and how many years should be there.
\"Which\" means that he depicts how things should go and stand in the
world at that time, who should have the supreme rule, or where the
empire should be, so that he proclaims not only the time, but also the
change, form, and nature of that time. This greatly strengthens our
Christian faith and makes us secure and firm in our conscience, because
we can see that which he has so long before described and presented to
us in his book clearly and correctly. For Daniel prophesies freely and
clearly that Christ\'s future and the beginning of his kingdom (which is
his baptism and preaching ministry) shall take place after the king

1\) Everything that now follows is also the conclusion of the preface
from 1530 (Erlangen edition).

Cores at five hundred and ten years, Dan. 9, 25, and the empire of the
Persians and Greeks should be over in the world, and the Roman empire
should go on its way, Dan. 7, 25. 9, 27, so that Christ must surely come
at the time of the Roman empire, when it was at its best, which should
also destroy Jerusalem and the temple, because after the same empire
there should come no more, but the end of the world should follow it; as
Daniel Cap. 2, 44. and Cap. 7, 9. clearly proclaims.

\(21\) Before the world he was also an excellent, great man, for we see
here that he rules the first two kingdoms as the chief. As if God should
say: I must give people to these kingdoms, and should I let my Jerusalem
and my people be disturbed about it. And even though he was not a king,
nor did he have any great good or honor from it, he still had the royal
works, business and offices and carried them out; as it is the way of
the world that those who work the most at court have the least, and
those who do nothing get almost the most, according to the evangelical
saying: \"Another sows, another reaps\", John 4, 37. 4:37. Yes, which is
worse, he must still have hatred, envy, driving and persecution to pay
for it, as the world is wont to pay for all service and good deeds with
such wages.

\(22\) But it does not harm Daniel; he prefers God, who rewards him the
more abundantly, and considers Daniel a king in Babylon and Persia. For
he reckons and judges by deed and fruit, not by person and name.
Therefore Daniel is the right king of Babylon and Persia, even though he
does not have a royal person or name, and has not much good, but
misfortune and all kinds of evil. Behold, God is able to comfort and
honor His captive Jews by making a son of a citizen of ruined Jerusalem
a two-faced emperor of Babylon and Persia. Summa, among all the children
of Abraham, none is so highly exalted in the world as Daniel. Joseph was
great in Egypt with King Pharaoh; David and Solomon were great in
Israel; but they are all lowly kings and lords, compared to the kings of
Babylon and Persia, of whom Daniel was the chief ruler, whom he also

942 **Erl. 41, 323 f.** Interpretations on the prophets. **W. VI,
1492-1494.** 943

miraculously converted to God, and no doubt produced great fruit in both
empires among many people who came to the knowledge of God through him
and were saved, as the letters and commandments of the same emperor that
one should honor Daniel\'s God in all lands well indicate, Dan. 2, 47.
and 6, 26.

23 We now command this Daniel to be read by all devout Christians, for
whom it is comforting and useful in these miserable last days. But it is
of no use to the ungodly, as he himself says at the end: \"The ungodly\"
remain ungodly and \"do not respect it. For such prophecies of Daniel
and the like are not written for the sole purpose of knowing the history
and future afflictions, and to atone for the foreknowledge, as with a
new newspaper, but that the pious may comfort themselves with them and
make themselves joyful, and strengthen their faith and hope in patience,
as they see and hear that their afflictions have come to an end, and
they are delivered from sins, death, the devil, and all evil (after
which they groan), in

to come to Christ in heaven, to his blessed, eternal kingdom. Just as
Christ also comforts His own through the terrible visions and says:
\"When you see these things, look up and lift up your heads, for your
redemption is near\" 2c. Therefore we also see here that Daniel always
ends all visions and dreams, however horrible they are, with joy,
namely, with Christ\'s kingdom and future, for the sake of which future,
as for the noblest, final main part, such visions and dreams are formed,
interpreted and written.

\(24\) Whoever then wishes to read them usefully should not cling to
history and remain there, but should feed and comfort his heart in the
promised and certain future of our Savior Jesus Christ, as in the
blessed and joyful redemption from this pitiful valley and misery. To
this end may our dear Lord and Savior, together with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, help us, vowed forever and ever, amen.

**3. disputation on Dan. 4, 24. \*)**

Whether Daniel ascribes justification to works by saying, \"Rid yourself
of your sins by almsgiving.

Held 1535.

**Translated from Latin.**

1\. the faith of all believers of the Old Testament (antiquorum) has
been a faith in the Christ to come, as it is written \[Heb. 13:8\]:
\"Christ yesterday and today.\"

2\. they believed in God, but in the God who had promised Christ, and
this they expected.

All sayings that deal with sins or good works presuppose faith, Heb. 11,

4\. because sin cannot be recognized without the knowledge of God; for
he who does not believe that God is an avenger does not recognize sin.

\(5\) Thus a good work cannot be recognized without the knowledge of
God, for he will not do good who does not believe that God is pleased
with it and will reward it.

6\. this is what is said \[Hebr. 11,. 6.\]: \"Whoever wants to come to
God, must

\*) This disputation is found in Latin in the Thesensammlungen of 1538
and 1558. In the Latin \"Gesammtausgabe\": in the Wittenberg (1550),
toru. I, toi. 397d; in the Jena one (1579), tom. I, toi. 514 and in the
Erlanger, opp. vur. ur.\], vol. IV, p. 411. We have translated according
to the Wittenberg.

944 L. v.iv. **4ii** f. Disputation on Dan. 4, 24. **W.vi,i494f.** 945

believe that he is, and will be a retributor to those who seek him.\"

This can be easily understood from the description of the sin and the
good work, since the sin is a work against God\'s law, but the good work
is according to God\'s law.

Therefore God must necessarily be understood or known beforehand, who
cannot be known without faith.

\(9\) Therefore, before every work, either one believes or one does not
believe.

10 Therefore, these passages must be understood of the whole Christian
life or of faith made flesh (de fide incarnata) 1): \"Be loosed from
your sins\" 2c.

\(11\) And it is the opinion: Believe that God is angry with sin, and be
reconciled to the righteous \[by faith; and that this faith is the right
faith, testify with the works.

The word \"sin\" is to be considered and explained here, so that it is
soon proven that God is understood beforehand, who both wraths and
forgives.

13 Therefore, when Daniel exhorts the king of Babylon to change his
whole life, he teaches that forgiveness of sins is obtained through true
faith (which does the works).

1\) Compare Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. IX. 362, § 304; üä68
inearuLta is the faith united with the \"Thun\".

14 For in saying, \"Your sins,\" he shows him the wrath of God, that is,
the law, and that he was a sinner before God, which the king had not
known.

15\) By saying: \"Get rid of yourself through charity\" 2c., he shows
him the grace of God by which sins are forgiven if he believes and
proves his faith through almsgiving.

16 For if he did not believe Daniel that he had sinned and deserved
God\'s wrath, he would not turn from sins.

17 Again, if he did not believe that God would forgive, he would not
make an effort to give alms.

\(18\) Accordingly, Daniel has summed up in this word the whole
doctrine, namely, the law and the gospel, that is, the whole life of
believers,

\(19\) Just as in the doctrine of morals a right mind (recta ratio) and
good will are always presupposed when what is right and honorable is
commanded.

20\. But the sayings that speak of the whole Christian life or of the
faith that has become flesh and blood are not to be used against a part,
that is, against faith alone, or justifying faith,

Otherwise, there will be obvious fraud in combining and dividing
(fallacia compositionis et divisionis). 2)

2\) Compare Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. IX, 638, § 89.

A46 L. XXIV, 7. interpretations on the prophets. 947

**E. D. Martin Luther\'s interpretation of the prophet Hosea.**

**1. notes about the prophet pants,**

copied from lectures by D. M. Luther.\*)

First redaction, according to the Zwickau manuscript.

Issued approximately between March and July 1524. Printed in 1884.

**Translated from Latin.**

**The first chapter.**

**V. 1. the word of the Lord.**

It is known that the Hebrews and the prophets have this habit of
beginning their books with superscriptions. God always calls to
repentance before His wrath comes, as can be seen in Jonah among the
Ninevites and in Christ among the Jews.

But here the prophet starts the word in a ridiculous way, at the 1) time
when the feisty

1\) Instead of etiam in the Erlanger we have assumed with the
Weimarschen so.

and fat kingdom of Israel under Jeroboam was in its highest bloom, 2) so
that 3) they thought Hosea was nonsensical, and moreover the words \[v.
2.\], \"Take a harlot woman,\" 2c. are foolishness, especially in such a
learned and wise people. There is no doubt that he

2\) In the Erlanger, the comma after üorsbat is to be deleted.

3\) Instead of st in the Erlanger ut will have to be read, because
otherwise the following conjunctive would have no rsZsns. The Weimar
version offers the latter reading.

\"This writing was found by G. Buchwald in the Rathsschulbibliothek in
Zwickau in the year 1883. They are notes which Stephan Roth, later town
clerk in Zwickau, collected from Luther\'s lectures on Hosea. From the
fact that in the book in which Roth noted these notes, they are preceded
by a sermon of Luther, which was held on Palm Sunday 1524, but
immediately after our writing follows another sermon of Luther, which he
held on Trinity Sunday 1524, V. Linke concludes that the lectures took
place between Easter and Pentecost 1524. But the Weimar edition notes
that it can be concluded from the better writing that we are not dealing
here with a postscript produced in the college. With respect to the
time, it limits itself to saying (Vol. XIII, Einl. p. XXXII1): \"Towards
March 1524, the lessons on Hosea began, and at the end of July, he was
in Joel. We also leave it at that. Buchwald copied our writing from the
original and gave it to D. Joh. Linke, Archdeacon in Altenburg, for
publication. The latter included it in 1884 in the Latin edition of
Erlangen, sxsK. opp., tom. XXIV, p. 6. While Roth only put as title: In
Orsas propöetinm Voe: Mar: I\^n:, Linke has given the writing the title:
\^\<Inotntion68 in Oream kropftstam ex p\^neleetione V. Martini Imtfteri
VnittemperAae anno MVXXIV. exeeptae. - Already after a few years, namely
in 1889, a new reprint of our writing appeared in the Weimar edition,
vol. XIII, p. 1, after repeated comparison of the original, with the aid
of a manuscript in the Marienbibliothek in Halle, the only one that
contains the lectures on all twelve minor prophets. This work, which was
written with great care as far as the comparison of the manuscripts is
concerned (the Bible is not so diligently consulted), and in which
innumerable errors of the original edition have been corrected, we owe
to the licentiate Gustav Koffmane, pastor at Kunitz in Silesia. In the
Weimar edition, the next following scripture in this volume is added to
the present one at the foot of the pages in the form of notes. We have
translated according to the Weimar edition. One will encounter many
words and phrases in this manuscript, which we have placed in speech
marks to indicate that they are found in the manuscript in German. - We
have preferred to give the key words according to the text of our Bible
rather than in a new translation, so that the reader can recognize with
certainty what verse or verse is interpreted each time, because even the
editors of both the Erlangen and the Weimar editions have repeatedly
failed to recognize what the interpretation refers to, even though they
had the original text before their eyes. This can be seen from the
annotations we have made.

948 k. XXIV. 7-9. notes on Hosea, Cap. 1, 1-5. V 949

was taken for a fool and a heretic. But this is the nature of the word,
namely, that it acts foolishly with the most wise; and also another
nature, which the word has in itself, is the cross. This could not be
omitted for him, especially because he alone argues against all
prophets, also against Moses, as it seems. Moses says that Israel is the
people of God; the latter denies that God is the God of Israel. The
latter promises that God is merciful; the latter says that Israel\'s sin
cannot be forgiven. Therefore it follows with necessity that he was an
outright heretic for the priests and the scribes.

It seems that the prophet, in his old age, still lived in the captivity
that he predicted.

Here one raises great questions because of that whore-wife: whether the
prophet had fornicated out of dispensation of God, or whether he had
taken a whore to wife. This is not enough for me, what some say, not
even the words of Jerome. Further down \[v. 4. 6. 9.\] the children with
their names represent the people, what kind of people the Israelites
would be. I think that the same must be said of the harlot, that she was
called a harlot woman, to mean the people who now whored against God and
would do the same in the future. So also the children begotten with her
are called harlot children. Therefore, do not understand it to mean that
the woman has been involved in fornication, that is, do not take uxorem
fornicationum in an active way, but understand it to mean that the woman
has suffered it, that she and her children and her husband are so called
for the sake of the people and against the people. \"I am called a
harlot, and my husband a fornicator, because ye are harlots and
knaves.\" Behold, how great a cross they have suffered for the sake of
the word of God by these defamatory names. He prophesies not only with
words, but also with his sensations and sensually perceptible 2) things.

1\) Here the Erlanger still asked: etc.

2\) In the original: diiidns. Instead, we have assumed sensidiiidns. The
Weimar edition did the same, but it erased sonsikns st, which is in the
original.

**V. 2. Since the Lord began (Initium etc.).3)**

\"The beginning\" is more correctly understood as \"when the LORD began
4) to speak through Hosea.\"

**For the land runs after fornication from the LORD. 5)**

He uses a common expression. The right seed by which your souls are made
chaste is the word of God. If you deviate from it, you are hurting. This
is transferred to the spirit by a simile taken from the flesh. But \"to
whore\" means to practice idolatry. Idolatry is trusting in works, and
fornication is sinning against the first commandment through unbelief.
And really, to fornicate is to do against the first commandment in the
name of God, that is, not to do in faith what you pretend to do in the
service of God.

**V. 4. Jezreel. 6)**

This was once the capital of the kingdom \[1 Kings 18:45\].

We must take care that we understand the history in the most simple way,
from which alone can be recognized how reliable (quanta fide) the
prophet had been here. For Jehu had turned to godlessness after he had
behaved well. This began under Zechariah, the great-grandson of Jehu (2
Kings 15:11), and the visitation of the kingdom lasted until the
captivity.

V. 5. **at the same time.**

Here he prophesies a word of faith by which they should have been led to
repentance. He proclaims desolation, and God gives blessings. So he is a
heretic; to the fire with him! But still the word of God is alive 2c.

3\) In the Vulgate; Drindxinin ioynenäi Domino in 0866.

4\) Erlanger: oopit instead of: coopit.

5\) In the Erlangen edition: \"Hnia kornioaris:\". Instead, as it says
in the Vulgate and in the next following scripture, should be read:
tznia kornioans lornioaditnr.

6\) Instead of: IsraUtzi in the Erlanger mußge

will read. Immediately following motroxolis instead of metraxoiis.

950 xxiv. s-ii. Interpretations on the prophets. 951

**V. 4. About the house of Jehu.**

We do not know whether this must be taken in an active or in a suffering
way, and the histories do not help us whether this house shed blood or
suffered its blood to be shed. Jehu was a good king, but neither he, nor
any of the other kings of Israel did away with the golden calves with
their service, without which, they thought, the kingdom could not stand
2c. The meaning will now be this: Jehu had shed his blood for the
calves\' sake in Jezreel. This prophecy was unbelievable, namely that
the kingdom which GOD had promised to Jehu should be taken away because
of 1) the godless kings. They could not believe it until they felt it.
But, you say, even to Jeroboam the kingdom of Israel was given by GOD. I
answer: That is true, but always with the condition attached to it: if
you do my will. The kingdom of Judah is David\'s kingdom, which came to
Christ as an eternal one; but the kingdom of Israel was transferred to
the Assyrians and never returned. 2) The names \[of the children, which
are translated in the Vulgate\] 3) should have remained Hebrew:

**V. 6. LoRyhamo (Absque misericordia).**

That is, it meant 4) the people whose God will never have mercy on.
Before \[v. 4. f.\] he says he will make the kingdom desolate, but here
he will never restore it. Ps. \[28, 5. Vulg.\]: 5) \"Thou wilt break it,
and not build it\" 2c. He does not, therefore, speak here of the
evangelical mercy of which he says afterwards \[v. 7.\], but that he
will not restore the kingdom. But it follows of the enduring kingdom,
\"Yet will I have mercy upon the house of Judah,\" 2c. This had to
remain until Christ, who fortified it for eternity.

1\) Weimarsche: propter; in the Zwickau manuscript: per.

2\) This sentence has put the Weimar after adeyue nnseriooräia.

3\) Added by us.

4\) Weimarsche: sisniüoadat instead of: sixniüeadit in the Zwickau
manuscript.

5\) Erlanger:?sa1lnn8. vestrues eto.

But 6) in the fact that ten tribes were led away, and two of the
Assyrians could not be led away, one obviously sees the effectiveness of
the power 7) of God and His word, which He thus expresses in clear
words:

**V. 7. And I will help them rc. 8)**

With wonderful words (see 2 Kings 19:30) all prophets point to the
kingdom of Christ. And notice that it must be true that Israel will
never return, and yet Israel will be one kingdom with Judah.

**V. 8. Since she had weaned him (Ablactavit).**

This is perhaps a secret, that the whole people, concerning the outward
service, should be left (not only Israel), 9) since they became one man
\[1 Cor. 13, 11.\] 2c. The third child (tertia proles) therefore
connects the prophecy of the temporal kingdom with the eternal kingdom
2c. Henceforth I will no longer cherish the synagogue, I will procure
another people. If this people will go over to the same, it will be
blessed; if not, it shall not be my people 2c. This people must be
rejected and a new one 10) adopted, so that all the prophecies are true
11) which seem to be contrary to each other, even in this passage. He
says there will not be one people, and yet 2c.

**V. 10. But there will be the number of the children of Israel 2c.**

Here you see what Paul says Rom. 1, 1. f.: \"The gospel which is
promised in the prophets.\" See Paul\'s interpretation of this passage
\[Rom. 9, 23. ff\]. The Kingdom of Judah

6\) Weimarsche: vero instead of verdo in the Zwickau manuscript.

7\) In the Erlanger there is a dot after virtudis by mistake.

8\) Instead of: Ron salvado in the Erlanger must: Ltsalvado must be
read. The same error is also in the Weimar edition, which is due to the
fact that the second 8a1vado in this verse was taken as the keyword
instead of the first.

9\) These brackets are set by us. The Erlanger has a punctum after
Israel.

10\) Erlanger: camouflage instead of: novurn.

11\) Instead of vere in the Erlanger, we have assumed verae.

952 L. XXIV, II f. Notes on Hosea, Cap. 1, 10. 11. 953

has never been eradicated, but transformed into a better one. The
kingdom of Christ is the preservation of the kingdom of Judah. - \"Their
number shall be as the sand of the sea.\" Likewise it is said in Isaiah
\[Cap. 10, 22.\]. That this people had greatly increased in the time of
Christ, and could not be numbered, the histories testify. Their land was
full, and almost in all the cities of the Gentiles, even at Rome, were
Jews. - \"In the place.\" Not in Jerusalem, 1) not in Judea, but where
hitherto the people of GOD were not, that is: the kingdom of GOD will be
preached, the victory over death, sin, 2) hell; otherwise they could not
be called \"children of GOD\" in a place that is not Jewish but Gentile.
They will be a different people, not bound to a place and to external
things.

**V. 11. One head.**

This must be understood with necessity of the kingdom of Christ. 3)
After the division of the kingdom according to Solomon, they never had
\"one head\", that is, a temporal king. These words: 4) \"They shall be
utterly cast away\" \[v. 6.\] and: \"They shall be the people and the
children of God\" \[v. 11.\], cannot exist at the same time 5), if

1\) Instead of \^ssrast in the Erlanger and in the Weimarschen we have
assumed leruLaiem, which offers the following writing.

2\) In the Erlanger there is no comma after psooati.

3\) Instead of: intsUiZit in the Erlanger will be after what the
following writing offers: oportet quoci intolliLatnr, to read:
intslliAitur. This has the Weimar edition.

4\) Instead of vsrda in the Zwickau manuscript, the Weimar one has:
vera. The sense is the same in both readings.

5\) Instead of soluiL in the Erlanger we have assumed Äinul. This has
also the Weimar edition.

It is not to be understood in such a way that the physical is thrown
away, and the spiritual is done with - \"And coming up out of the land\"
(Et ascendent \[de terra\]). They shall not set this kingdom on earth,
6) but shall ascend day by day more and more from the earth, from the
earthy to the heavenly. \[Col. 3:2:\] \"Seek that which is above\" 2c. -
\"For the day of Jezreel shall be a great day.\" I believe this is added
to obscure the prophecy to unbelievers, so that it cannot be seen until
it is fulfilled, as is the case with all prophecies. For \"the great
day\" is when GOD will enlighten the hearts of men to be \"children of
GOD.\" No longer is the bodily \"Jezreel\" understood, but the heavenly
one, \[as by \"Israel\"\] often not the bodily one returned, so also not
the Israel according to the flesh, or \[by \"Zion\" the bodily) Zion is
expressed, but the spiritual one. We hardly find names in the Hebrews
which do not have the name of God \"El\" or \"Yes\" at the end, as
Michael, Isaiah, Jeremiah. Thus 8) Jerusalem is a vision of peace, that
is, where one can see peace and abundance of all things; so \"Jezreel\"
is the seed of God, because there everything is in abundance. What is
the seed of God is known, Luc. 8, 11. 9) Hence comes \"children of God\"
\[v. 10\].

6\) pouent and sxtollsutur. So the Zwickau manuscript; instead the
Weimar one has: xonit and extolIstur.

7\) These additions find added by us to give sense.

8\) In Latin erZo instead of \[st.

9\) Hone 8. is missing in the Zwickau manuscript.

**The second chapter. \*)**

I understand it in such a way that the whole chapter is said to those
who have obtained mercy, both Gentiles and Jews. I understand the
outcast sister to be the unbelieving Jews, so that the voice,

which the prophet commands to speak to the brethren, is the voice of the
apostles and the Christians. The word is the word of the Gospel; the
synagogue is the mother of the Church. You, my mother, are not the wife
of God,

\* ) Here and several times in the following the word: Lequitur is
placed before the number of the chapter. We have not included this.

954 LXIV , 12-14. interpretations on the prophets. 955

of my father. The gospel condemns the works of the law and what the
mother puts her trust in; all that the mother uses as a pretext for her
ungodliness is void; she is a whore.

**V. 2 Speak the judgment (Judicate).**

That is, the verdict of condemnation falls against those who say that
they want to believe like the fathers. That in which they trust is
ungodliness, human statutes against the word of God. Paul says \[Rom. 9,
8.\]: \"These are not the children of God, who are children according to
the flesh\" 2c. - \"The breasts\" are the ungodly teachers who, as it
were, like breasts of a mother 1) nourish the people; but they belong to
an ungodly mother who has conceived in adultery.

**V. 3. that I do not strip them naked (spoliabo).**

I will take away the priesthood, the kingdom, the law, even all earthly
things. This has happened, as we see. - \"When she was born.\" Since she
had neither kingdom nor priesthood. - \"As a dry land.\" That is, where
there shall be no teacher, no prophet, no word of God. Is. 5, 6.: \"I
will command the clouds \"rc. Christ says \[Matt. 21:43\], \"The kingdom
shall be taken from you.\" - \"Lest I cause them to die of thirst.\"
Joh. 7, 37. These are all threats if they do not repent.

**V. 5. I will run after my wooers.**

This is not to be understood of fornication after the future of Christ
\[but of that which is already present and of that which is far
future\]. 2) The Hebrew language is very rich. It sometimes says in one
word what we can hardly state in many words, and sometimes in many words
what could have been expressed in two words, as here. - \"They that give
me \[bread,\] water.\" Scripture punishes the ungodly teachers, the
belly servants who teach ungodly things that bring profit. That\'s what
it says here. The papists had abundance, the evangelical ones

1\) Erlanger: mortuu instead of: rauterna.

2\) Inserted by us according to the following scripture.

Preachers today suffer from lack. One cannot feed them a wife; those
were fed so many harlots. This is how it was with the Jews in the past,
and with the wicked in the past: What is the law and the teaching of the
law for me? Other things must give us bread 2c. So also all the people
and the princes say to Jeremiah, \"We will offer Melecheth of heaven
drink offerings,\" Jer. 44, 17. See also after in the history of the
Maccabees \[1 Macc. 1, 12.). The belly cannot rely on GOD; if you hear
that, you will fall into adultery. \"The pretenders\" were the Gentiles,
Assyrians, Moabites 2c. Whose friendship they could not have
unless\^they turned to their gods. The godless doctrine finds rich
pasture, the godly must suffer want. Virtue is praised, but brings in
nothing. 3)

**V. 6. I will bequeath your way.**

She did say: \"I want to -run after my courtesans\", but she did not
obtain what she wanted. She wanted to be safe from the Assyrians,
Ammonites 2c. by joining their gods, 4) but thereby she came to fall, as
that king \[Ahaz\] said \[2 Chron. 28, 23. Vulg.): \"I will reconcile
the gods of Syria with sacrifices\" 2c.

Here the Lord resisted them until they said, as it is read in the book
of Judges \[Cap. 3, 10. 6, 6: Lord, help me!

**V. 7. Since I was better.**

For at that time I alone had tribulation in the flesh; but here the
flesh and the Spirit are rejected.

**V. 8. She does not want to know.**

She did not recognize the hand of the giver. The wicked say and confess
that they serve the true God, and of the goods (bona) that they have,
they say that they have them from the God whom they serve and worship. I
am a monk and serve God with vows and ceremonies, and He will give me
eternal life for His sake. But who

> 3\) Probably according to duvEnat. I, 73: kroditas taudutur st (Wenn.
> Ausg.).

4\) Erlanger: satiata instead of: koeiatu.

[956 L. xxiv, 14-17. notes on Hosea, cap. 2, 8-15. 957]{.underline}

makes you certain that you are worshipping the true God, since he has
not commanded this? You have therefore invented a God for yourself who
wants this, since there is no true God who requires this or who wants to
give eternal life for the sake of these things. What, then, do you
worship but an idol of your heart, to whom, you think, the righteousness
of your works pleases. Therefore they know not the hand of him that
giveth, especially they who most boast that they know it. All Scripture
urges that the true God be rightly known. Where this knowledge is not
there, there must be this fornication and false thoughts of God. Outward
idolatry has also arisen from this. Those pagans or the godless Jews did
not say that they worshipped the devils, but God. This Baal is the God
who brought us out of Egypt; these golden calves are gods 2c. The wicked
do not hear this: Trust in GOD and you will be saved, but: Go to a
monastery and do this and that. The people also want to be deceived and
attribute everything they receive to the ungodly service of God. -
\"Baal\" is actually called a husband, and the lord of the wife and the
house. Those who dream that it is an imperfect life to serve God in
faith and love, and a perfect one to keep virginity, poverty and
obedience, serve Baal.

V. 9. **Therefore I will take my grain and must again.**

I will take away the grain and other things, I will spoil them with
harmful air and weather and force them to return to me. They boast of
works and ceremonies. Therefore the priests have abundance and cherish
the ungodly being, as if they were next to God, with whose gifts they
fatten themselves; I will take them away. If today the belly of the pope
were in want, there would not be so many papists.

V. 10. **In the sight of their wooers.**

They will be put to shame, beaten by their enemies to whom they had
fallen away, seduced by deceivers.

**V. 12. This is my reward.**

Even hostilely (odiose) the scripture repeats this. - Instead of *eam*
\[in the Vulgate), rather eas should be read. - \"The beasts\" are the
hostile heathen.

**V. 13. with clasps (inaure).**

\"With her earrings\" \[in the Vulgate) is an image taken from virgins
or women. Inauris is the word that is ungodly with the ungodly, godly
with the godly, and the word of GOD. - \"To whom she offered incense\"
(addebat). That is, she prayed, for incense in Scripture means prayer.

**V. 14. Therefore.**

These are all, as I have said, words put into the mouths of the
apostles, and the verba which preceded in the future tense should rather
be conjunctive. - \"I will entice them\" (lactabo - I will nourish
them). I will teach you through my apostles a lovely doctrine, one other
than the law is. - \"Into a wilderness.\" Not into a land which is
temporally in bloom, that is, not where carnal things are in view. -
\"And speak kindly to it\" (loqui ad cor). \"Speak to the heart\" is a
Hebrew idiom for speak kindly to. Isa. 40, 2. 1)

**V. 15. their vineyards (vinitores).**

\[In the Vulgate: \"vinedressers\" or \"vineyards\". Here 2) faith will
be necessary, and that the Father draws with the kind words of the
Gospel, for who could otherwise suppose \"vineyards\" or vinedressers,
that is abundance, in the desert? - \"From the same place,\" that is, in
the wilderness-\"the valley of Achor.\" Jos. 7, 24. ff: \"Achor,\" that
is, of affliction. It seems that among the Hebrews \"the valley of
Achor\" had become a proverb, so that the valley of Achor is called when
someone is oppressed by troubles, as we say: a valley of lamentation or
a valley of tears. I,\" he says, \"will talk to her and turn her misery
into good hope.

1\) In both editions, this note comes after the following one, and is
labeled \"V. 15.\"

2\) Weimarsche: Noe. Here we have adopted with the Erlanger liic.

[958 XXIV, I7-IS. Interpretations on the prophets. 959]{.underline}

ren. - Instead of \"hope\", however, one would rather like to read
waiting or patience. But this seems to be rather the opinion: I will
give her the Valley of Achor, that is, the cross and visitation with
misfortune, so that she will be prepared for me as a wife through
patience. The Valley of Achor will be better for her than the riches of
Baal. - \"And she shall sing.\" This is the praise of God in the New
Testament, that we are delivered from death and all misery.

**V. 16. Then.**

This is said of the new testament and the preaching of the gospel. This
is not understood by those who do not know what the gospel is.-\"Then,\"
namely, when I shall have enticed her and led her into the wilderness
\[v. 16.\], when I shall have changed the carnal kingdom into a
spiritual one 2c.-\"My Baal.\" That is, my spouse \[will no longer call
me my Baal\] . 1) This worship and confidence I will take away, on which
she has relied, that I am a husband especially to her for works\' sake
2c. All other confidence and wrong opinion I will take away and reveal
myself in truth. Here note that the outward worship was not done to the
wood, stone 2c. but to GOtte. For GOtte clearly says here that he is
called \"Baal\" by them. - \"Baal\" and \"Baalim.\" Jointly for both
sexes (promiscue) they used these words \"spouse\" or \"spouses\". Ahab
together with Jezebel were exceedingly clever people according to the
flesh, in comparison to which our princes are lumps. These set up an
outward service before other kings by accepting priests who were to
confirm this service from the law of Moses. Therefore, Jehu must have
had a very excellent enlightenment from God, who had these things.

**V. 17: I will put away the names of Baalim from their mouths.**

That is, I will show them this grace, that one shall no longer teach
fictitious things, but my truth. This is certainly a great promise 2c.

1\) Inserted by us according to the following scripture.

**V. 18. And I will make them a covenant.**

That is, I will take care that nothing can harm him \[the Christian\].
For even the wild beasts will be with us, and everything will be under
our feet. This is not an outward covenant; the believer has everything.
If I speak to this mountain 2c. \[Matth. 17, 20.\], if I said to a wild
beast, Come, it will come 2c. Everything is ours, everything is for
salvation. See Isa. 2, 4. \[11, 6. ff.\] Ps. 46, 10.: \"He who controls
the wars\" 2c. This is to be understood of the kingdom of Christians and
their behavior toward one another. Rom. 5, 1: \"Now then we have been
justified\" 2c. If we have peace with GOD, we have \[everything,\] 2)
even against the will of the devil and the whole kingdom of sin and
hell. - Instead of fiducialiter \[in the Vulgate\], rather, \"surely\"
should be placed, as follows.

**V. 19. I will betroth myself to you.**

These are glorious words. He does not say, I will make a covenant, as to
the fathers \[Gen. 9:9, 11.\], but, \"I will betroth myself to thee.\"
There is no more ardent love on earth than between bridegroom and bride.
The bridegroom does not give a gift, but gives himself to the bride, and
the most intimate affection of the heart, and all that he has; he comes
before the bride and claims her 2c. - \"Righteousness\" is the
righteousness by which we are made righteous; by \"judgment\" we condemn
what is ours and error, and are lords over all, so that even sin cannot
accuse us after we have overcome that righteousness. - In misericordia,
that is, \"in grace\" or through goodness (beneficio), Greek:

*χάρις,* Hence, \"in grace\" (gratiosus), that is, who has obtained
grace (misericordiam). Also among the Greeks 3) *Ελεημοσύνη* is a.

The act of kindness done to one\'s neighbor. - And mercy. Imperfection
will cling to you, but I will not impute it to you. I will bear your way
(mores), I will help you, I will have compassion on you.

2\) Added by us.

3\) Instead of et, \"st\" should be read. After that we have translated.

960 L. xxlv.idf. Notes on Hosea, cap. 2, 20-23. 961

**V. 20. In faith.**

The Hebrew language is very rich; it often repeats the same thing. Now
here he interprets himself: Can we, for instance, grasp this engagement
with our hands? Will it be a carnal righteousness? No, but it will be a
marriage and a kingdom of faith. In the Gospel it is said \[Matt.
22:2\], \"The king made marriage to his son.\" In the Hebrew it says
\[instead of: \"in faith\"\]: in truth, but it is the same, only that
the Jews nowadays, as well as some of ours, like to quarrel about words,
which also happened in the time of the apostles. Set all this against
works; she becomes a bride by righteousness, judgment, grace, mercy,
faith, that is, not by works. - \"And thou shalt know.\" Here is the
increase in faith from day to day that Paul everywhere wishes us to
have.

**V. 21. At the same time.**

Paul also says \[2 Cor. 6, 2.\] from Isaiah \[Cap. 49, 8.\], \"I have
heard thee in the pleasant time.\" Likewise \[Isa. 65, 24.\], \"And it
shall come to pass, before they call, that I will answer.\" The glory of
the Christian is that we are heard when we call in trouble, and the
Spirit pleads for us. \[John 16. 24\...\] \"Ask, and ye shall receive\"
2c. Let us pray for the word against the heretics, against Satan for the
need of this life 2c. - \"I will hear.\" You shall not pray in vain.
This must be understood par excellence, lest we deal ill with the
Scriptures. Jezreel will desire grain, oil 2c. The grain will desire to
be there, the earth will hear the desire of the grain; the earth will
desire rain from heaven, heaven will desire it from me. All creatures
will serve all believers, and I will serve them in all creatures. But if
it is the will of God

1 Petr. 1, 6. that we suffer hardship, God will not leave us so that His
creatures are not present 2c.

**V. 22. Jezreel.**

This is added to darken the prophecy, as said above \[Cap. 1, 11.\]. As
the churches of Jerusalem are named, so these of Jezreel the capital, as
above. - It would have been clearer if instead of exaudiam \[in the
Vulgate\] it had been said: respondebo, respondebunt 2c.

**V. 23. and I will keep them on earth for seed. 1)**

You see that the Lord alludes to the name Jezreel, as if he wanted to
say: She will be Jezreel to me in truth, that is, the seed or sowing of
God, that is, in her shall be the right word of God. Therefore, one can
quite certainly follow this spiritual interpretation of the name of the
church, since the LORD also interprets it in this way. And besides, he
said above \[Cap. 1, 6. f.\]: \"I will not have mercy on Israel, 2) but
on the house of Judah\", so Jezreel is spiritual, as also at the end of
the previous chapter. From both kinds of people the church is gathered
\[, from the spiritual and the bodily Jezreel\], 3) which before had not
yet obtained mercy. Since Christ says: \"Whoever believes and is
baptized will be saved,\" what is this but saying to the believers:
\"You are my people\"?

1\) In Latin: sernlnapo kam, ut sit rnitii terra. But the interpretation
fits just as well to the text of our Bible.

2\) \"Israel\" put by us (according to the Vulgate) instead of: \^esrael
in our template.

3\) This addition is made by us; without it, the false doctrine would
come out as if at some time the Church had not yet attained mercy.

962 L. XXIV. 2I-2L. Interpretations on the prophets. 963

**The third chapter.**

We have heard the prophecy of Christ. Throughout the rest of the book,
he speaks against the hypocrites of his time and against the wicked,
except for the prophecy in the fourth chapter, where he deals with
prophecies of things to come.

**V. 1. And the Lord spoke to me 2c.**

He interprets what precedes. It is a figurative speech up to the words
\[v. 4.), \"For the children of Israel shall be a long time,\" 2c. where
he interprets himself. Some understand it of the Babylonian, others of
the Roman captivity. It is evident that it is not to be understood of
that, because he does not speak of the children of Judah, who were in
that captivity. I have taught that it must be understood of the
captivity of which he had previously said that the children of Israel
(Israelitae) were taken away and never brought back except spiritually.
The Jews will return to Christ, as Paul indicates \[Rom. 11, 25.\] that
it was through the gospel, and it seems to me that this refers to this
opinion. And let it not grieve thee that the same thing is signified
with divers images, for this is peculiar to the prophets, as Jeremiah
signified the same by the yoke \[Jer. 27:2.) and the cup \[Jer. 25:15.).
Here it seems to belong that he says: \"One more\", that is, again he
puts on him the one who is now a real adulteress, but he does not have
conjugal relations with her. - Dilige, \"woo with her\". The LORD
interprets this: \"As the LORD boos for the children of Israel,\" and
yet she is an adulteress and trusts in other gods. - Vinacia I do not
know what it means, but it has reference to wine. I think that it means
what is left over after the grapes are squeezed and thrown to the pigs.
From the truth they fall away to human statutes and belly doctrines. It
has the appearance of grapes, but the juice is squeezed, that is, they
are husks for the

Pigs. Others take it for wine containers (vasa vini), so that also the
picture remains: Empty vessels and the appearance they love, the right
wine they despise 2c.

**V. 2. And I became one with her.**

Instead of: Et fodi would be more correctly said: Pepigi eam, that is, I
made a contract with her, I agreed with her on the price, that she
should keep to me and abstain from adultery and from another marriage.-I
hold that the Hebrew word \"homer\" (chorus) denotes only a bushel. This
word also occurs in the Gospel.

**V. 4. And the children of Israel will be a long time 2c.**

Here he interprets the picture. - Instead of sedebunt, it should rather
read, \"They will remain.\" - \"The children of Israel.\" So he is not
talking about Judah\'s captivity, and furthermore, \"without a king\"
does not fit Judah. And he is not talking about the \"ephod\" that GOD
appointed that was at Jerusalem, but about the kings, sacrifices, ephods
that were now and then in Israel, not according to GOD\'s ordinance.
Here it belongs that he says: \"Sanctuary\" (Teraphim), which actually
means images, nne one reads of the idols of Rachel, which does not fit
Judah, but he means by it the images of Israel, 1ne golden calves or
other things, of which one does not read that GOD had appointed them.
Therefore he says: All yours will come to ruin, which you have now
erected in worship.

**V. After.**

This must necessarily be understood to have happened after the Assyrian
captivity, but we do not read of any other return of Israel than that
which happened through Christ. - \"And seek David their king.\" It is
clear that this is understood of the return through the gospel to
Christ, David\'s son 2c. He does not say: To their king of Israel.

[964 L. xxiv, 2S-25. notes on Hosea, Cap. 3, 5. 4, 2. 3.
965]{.underline}

they will return to their sacrifices 2c., but they will return to the
king of Judah, to David. - Instead of sa, it should rather read apud.
\"In the latter times,\" that is, in later times. Those are mistaken who
do not know this way of speaking of Scripture, and understand such
things of the last time of the world. - \"And honor his grace\" (Et ad
bonum ejus \[pavebunt\])). These are very clear words, namely, that this
belongs to spiritual things. Paul says \[Rom. 14, 16.): \"That your
treasure (bonum) be not blasphemed

become\" 2c. This treasure is the gospel. With joy they will be afraid
of this treasure. Under the law they feared evil, here they will fear
good. By the word \"fear\" the security of the flesh is excluded 2c.
Notice that he says he gave temporal goods to the adulteress, just as
GOD gives to hypocrites; but the measure is described. In the spiritual
goods there is no measure, but it is only called \"the grace\" (bonum).
So much of the third chapter.

**The fourth chapter.**

In the same, the prophet begins to punish the public vices, the fruit of
unbelief, after he has acted on faith. The prophet is sure to preach the
word of the Lord 2c. - Instead of judicium, it would have been clearer:
The Lord has something against those who dwell in the land.-
Misericordia \[\"love\"\] is \"a benefit\", whether it be shown by God
to men, or by men to other men. - Veritas Paul often translates by
faith. Emetz \[XXX\] is truth (according to which 1) GOD is true)
active, amuna \[XXXXX\] passive, when he infuses truth into our hearts.
\"The just shall live by faith,\" that is, in the truth which he has
received, by which he himself is made true, that is, by which he adheres
to divine truth. Non est veritas \[that is\], \"there is no faithfulness
on earth.\" Faithfulness is with few, unfaithfulness with many. 2) -
Misericordia, \"friendship\"; no one does good to another.- Scientia,
better notitia, passive cognitio. Thus it is written in Isa. 11, 9:
\"The land is full of knowledge (scientia) of the Lord.\" So Cap. 53,
11. s: \"Through his er-.

1\) We have assumed hua instead of haarn with the Hallic handwriting.

2\) Instead of üäes we have assumed M\"/\" üäes. For as the sentence is
written in the manuscript and in the prints: Vsritas paaeornrn est, üä68
rnrUtornm, it seems to us to be untrue, and not at all according to
Luther\'s meaning.

knowledge\" (scientia) 2c.\]. To know God as God, that we receive from
Him all good 2c., that is the knowledge of God.

**V. 2. has overflowed \[inundaverunt\].**

That is, it is going on in momentum, or it has taken over everywhere -
Sanguis sanguinem tetigit, \"one shedding of blood upon another,\" that
is, bloodguilt, or the clamor because of shed blood, or for vengeance
2c.

V. 3. **Therefore.**

This is the punishment. - Lugebit (it will mourn) is a figurative
speech, that is: it will be devastated, it will get into great shortage,
\"the country will gain a miserable reputation, will go badly\". -
Infirmabitur (\"it will go evil\"). He speaks of vengeance on the land;
that is, it will become poor, it will decline, \"the cattle will
perish,\" whether the animals do not give birth or they perish through
pestilence. The dominion of man will diminish. - Congregabuntur (\"they
will be snatched away\"), they will be annulled, better: \"snatch up\",
so that neither fish nor animals nor birds are in the land. The Hebrew
says: to make an end \[XXXXX\]. In the Psalm (26:9.) it says, \"Take me
not away (ne congreges) with sinners.\"

966 p. xxiv.W-27. Interpretations on the Prophets. 967

**V. 4. But 2c.**

\"But let no one scold.\" ,\[Non\] arguatur quisquam,\" better, \"Let no
man tell them.\" Thus it is said in Isaiah \[Cap. 30, 10.), \"Preach 1)
us gently.\" - \"For,\" answers the prophet, \"there is such a people\"
who punish again him who says it to him and punishes it, and thrusts
your word into your mouth again.

V. 5. **by day and by night.**

That is, in short, \"today or tomorrow you will fall and will not be
helped\". - \"The prophet\", by this he understands the son who will
fall 2c., and he will also not grieve so much (tantum) about it. \"He
who cannot be told cannot be helped\" 2c. - \"I will execute thy
mother\" (tacere feci), or I will silence her. \[The Hebrew reads)
silere, \"to be silent.\" Virgil 2) speaks of the silent shadows, the
silent places. To make nothing; \"that is silent, never lets itself be
stirred\". By the \"mother\" he understands the synagogue.

**V. 6. because it does not want to learn (scientiam).**

That is, because of its ignorance, because it does not want to be
punished, does not want to be confronted, it should be silenced before
men (quiescet). Instead of: quia tu etc. it should read: \"Because you
have rejected the word of GOD (notitiam)\" 2c., as if he wanted to say:
You refuse to be instructed by God, and yet you boast of your priesthood
2c., therefore I will take away from you both teacher and pupil, and
make you not know me. I will deliver you to justice. The priesthood of
God is where the right knowledge of God is. Here is a threat of present
and future punishment.

**V. 7. The more of them will 2c.**

Secundum multitudinem eorum is a Hebrew way of saying, that is, as many
as they are, so many sins have they committed. Thus says

1\) Instead of loqueremini, the Vulgate reads loquimini.

2\) Vir.\]. lid. VI, v. 432.

Jeremiah, Cap. 2, 28.: They have as many mobs as they have villages and
cities \[secundum numerum etc. in the Vulgate\], so do we 2c.- \"Their
honor\" he calls their idols and their worship, which they had set up
under the pretense of the true God (de deo vero) 2c. So it says in the
Psalm \[Ps. 106, 20.\]: \"And transformed their honor\" 2c. sOur honor
is that,\] of which we boast and trust. This glorious splendor of the
sects I will turn into nothing. This is what happens to the papacy,
whose honor has been turned into shame. As if he wanted to say: \"They
make it too much for me\" 2c.

V. 8. **They eat the sin offerings of my people** (**peccata etc.** ).

That is, they are puffed up in their glory, they fatten themselves and
feed themselves gloriously on the sins of the people. They become rich,
they live deliciously, because the people are in the godless being. Note
the shameful (malam) interpretation of the papists: the more the people
have given, the more we have devoured. - Sublevare animam (the Psalm
\[Ps. 25, 1.\] says: Ad te levabo \[animam\] etc.)^4^ ) ift suspendere,
\"gape up, keep big\" 2c. Paul says \[Tit. 1, 14.\]: \"Pay no attention
to the Jewish fables\", that is, they shut the people\'s mouths
(suspendunt) and make them pay attention to their ungodliness and
unrighteousness, so that they think it is done and acted in a godly way.
This is the service of the priests.

**V. 9. therefore it shall be to the people 2c. (Et erit).**

Now the retribution follows. It was used as a proverb and it is still
now: \"One is as important to me as the other\", I will take away the
people and the priesthood \"I will wash up after them\".

3\) In the text: , 6t alnnt 86 6Ar6Ki6 psaeati\" popuü ste. sie mehren
sich von den funden xopnti\". The German is obviously the translation of
the preceding, therefore it is out of question that instead of
\"mehren\" \"nähren\" is to be read. (Weim. in the margin: \"nehren?\").

4\) These brackets are set by us. The Weimar edition has in the margin
\"Ps. 123, 1.\", but, as we think, erroneously, because it depends on a
voucher for levars. - In what follows we have resolved \"kaffen\" by
gaffen.

**968** L. XXIV, 27-2S. Notes on Hosea, cap. 4, 10-13. **969**

**V. 10: That they may eat, and not be satisfied; that they may commit
fornication, and not prosper.**

Ut manducent vel comedant, et non saturentur, ut fornicentur et non
abundent vel non succedat eis, \"to go away,\" it is better instead
of: 1) Et comedent etc., that is, I will bring you into want, poverty
and famine, that is, I will bring you into want, as if he wanted to say:
Now ye eat the sins of the people, ye shall fatten yourselves 2c. on
these things; I will make that ye shall not even have crumbs \"and
barks\" 2c. They cannot whore as much as they would like 2c. He will
leave the doing of ungodliness, and yet they cannot do it 2c.

**V. 11. Fornication, wine and must make mad.**

I think that this was a proverbial speech in the whole people through
the whole country, as if he wanted to say: One says quite rightly that
\"fornication, wine and drunkenness make fools\" 2c. Behold our
\"priests and monks,\" what is there that is more dull-witted and
unlearned than they? They are only concerned about their bellies, and
that they are real boozers. 2) In Hebrew this is expressed by \"wine and
must.

**V. 12. My people shall ask his wood, and his staff shall preach unto
him. 3)**

This is a better reading \[than in the Vulgate\]. Thus it is said in the
law \[Deut. 18:11\] that one shall not ask the dead 2c. As if to say,
\"Are they not great fools?\" They go to ask a wooden god for counsel,
and a staff gives them counsel 2c. They desire an answer. In diminutive
speech and contemptuously he says, \"His wood.\" Notice the passage Isa.
44, 9. Notice that he speaks of clothing and food, on which we

1\) The preceding is in the manuscript and in the prints still drawn
with to verse 9.

2\) Instead of ut 8urZuIioll68 we have assumed according to the
following scripture: st ut AurSulionss siut.

3\) Vulgate: kopulus rueus in liZno suo interroMvit 6t vacutus 6ZU8
aunuueiuvit 61. - We could have put these Latin words as a keyword, but
preferred to make Luther\'s improvement the keyword.

trust; nothing has made us dull but this whoredom of the spirit, riches,
wine and must 2c., abundance of goods 2c. These statutes, in which we
trust, we have made ourselves. Now say whether we are \"wiser\" than
those 2c. I do not think that the prophet is speaking here \"of divining
rods\", divining by the rods, but simply of the idols made of the wood
that grew in their gardens, and from which they could have made staves.
4) - \"For the spirit of harlotry seduces them.\" So you have to read.
That is, this wind causes them to err 2c. This is how Paul speaks in the
letter to the Ephesians \[Cap. 4, 14.\]. Instead of \"spirit\" it would
be better to say \"wind\", because there is no constancy here. This
image is taken from carnal fornication and transferred to spiritual
fornication.

V. 13. **Up on the mountains 2c.**

(Instead of accendebant he read \[, Luther: accendunt\]). 5) That is,
they run to idols, namely, on the mountains and hills. So they are also
punished by Jeremiah \[Cap. 2, 24.\] 2c. He punishes the noble and the
good works which they themselves have chosen. Therefore he says
afterwards \[Cap. 6, 6.\], \"I delight in love, and not in sacrifice\"
2c. Instead of: Accendunt thymiama it should rather be: \"they.

incense\" (incensant = incensa adolent) or burn incense. These names of
the trees except the first are uncertain 6) 2c.- \"For they have fine
(bona) shade.\" Dona, that is, jucunda. They sought delightful and green
places to tickle the senses also 2c. Instead of \"your brides,\" \[the
Hebrew\] says daughters-in-law. This is the punishment: under
fornication with idols they served the belly, from which follows
voluptuousness and carnal fornication 2c. as is now seen in the
clergy. - \"Therefore your daughters also become harlots\" 2c. because I
will allow it 2c. 7)

4\) The Weimar edition has added the preceding from v. 12 to v. II
without indicating by a paragraph or by a new verse number that
something new is beginning. The Erlanger has V. 12. in the margin.

5\) We consider these words, which we have placed in brackets, to be an
interjection by the postscript, which could be supplemented in the
manner indicated.

6\) Erlanger: iuneta instead of: incerta.

7\) The Weimar edition has drawn this last sentence to v. 14.

[970 L xxiv. 29-31. interpretations on the prophets. 971]{.underline}

**V. 14. Nor will I resist 2c.**

I will make them do all this with impunity, as is happening now. What is
the cause? It is a punishment of God 2c., because we do not have
understanding princes 2c.-\[\"Because you perform another service with
the whores.\"\] Instead of: conversabantur it should better read:
dispergebantur. They divided themselves into different parts, \"here a
whore host, there a whore host\". Because you are scattered among many
whores 2c. \"With the Bübinnen\" or whores is better than cum
effeminatis \[in the Vulgate\]. Jerome understands by this the cut-ups,
but I do not believe Jerome here. As if he wanted to say: As ye commit
fornication with the concubines or harlots, so shall your daughters
become harlots 2c. - \"For the foolish people will be smitten.\" This
will be the punishment, I will strike the people with blindness.

**V. 15. Will you, O Israel, fornicate, that only Judah 2c.**

He addresses the tribe of Judah: \"You who have the right kingdom, the
right priesthood and the right temple, see that you do not hurry. And
this will happen if you do what follows. As if he wanted to say: Stay
with your temple. Instead of \"BethAven\" Jerome rightly reads BethEl,
since one does not read anything about a service being held in BethAven.
The ordinary services were in the places where GOD had performed
something special (insigne) with the fathers. BethAven means a house of
iniquity. - \"And swear not, As the LORD liveth.\" That is, do not take
the name of the Lord in vain, because in these places there is not God,
but the devil. 1) Although God is everywhere, He does not want to be
worshipped as you intend, therefore \"do not swear\" 2c.

**\[v. 16. For Israel runs like a great heifer\].**

Israel discedit, \"steps out\" like a recalcitrant cow, \"a young
farr,\" 2) which is un-.

1\) We have added this sentence according to the Haitian manuscript; the
Zwickau one offers only: huiu in Uis loois non

2\) \"Farr\" put by us instead of \"bar\" in the prints. In Hebrew- like
a heifer.

bändig does not go along the right and middle road. It is better to put
\"toll\" instead of lasciviens; which does not stay on the road, but
deviates in its ways. 3) - \"So also the LORD will make them pasture\"
2c. \"Rhyme!\" 4) \"To make a lamb feed\" has no evil meaning, as Jerome
even forcibly twists it 2c. It cannot be understood of the Assyrian
captivity. As if to say: If you \[Judah\] continue in your ways, the
LORD will make you feed in happy pastures like sheep.

**V. 17 For Ephraim has joined himself to the idols.**

That is, look not on Ephraim, let him go, because he is the journeyman
of idols, \"is entered into covenant\" with Israel.

**V. 18. \[They have given themselves over to indulgence and
fornication.\] 5)**

Instead of separatum est it should better read: separatum sit. As if he
wanted to say: hold back and let it be far from you his indulgence in
the service of idols. \"Let them eat and drink, stay thou from it.\" -
Fornicatione for

nicati sunt[, better:]{.underline} fornicatione fornicentur

et diligant afferre ignominiam etc[. Let them, they may commit
fornication as they wish. 6) \"Shields\" \[what in Hebrew is called the
\"great Hansen\" among the people. GOd is also called a protector
(]{.underline}scutum[) or shield. -]{.underline} Diligant[, that is, it
may be their protectors (]{.underline}vel protectorum sui vel
prote[c]{.underline}

tores sui[), \"strive to bring much shame upon
themselves\".]{.underline}

**V. 19. \[The wind with its wings will drive them bound\] 7)**

Ligavit etc. Here \"Jerome has fehlet.\" \[Instead of confundentur a
sacrificiis suis the Septuagint has\] better thus: And their altars
shall be

3\) In the Weimar edition, the preceding, from \"B. 16.\" onward, is
added to B. 15. without any verse number. The Erlanger has the verse
number in the margin.

4\) In the prints: \"reum you.\"

5\) Vulgate: Ls\^aratum \[st eonvivium voruw, cornioations koruieati
suot.

6\) We have rearranged this sentence. In the original, it comes before
\"better\".

7\) Vulgate: ILxavit surr\" ventus in alis suis \"t eontuncksotur u
kaoriüeiis kuis.

[**972** L. XXIV, 31 f. Notes on Hosea, Cap. 5, 1. 2.
**973**]{.underline}

become disgraceful. Instead of spirit, it would have been better to say
\"wind\". - \[\"With its wings\", that is what it means in the wings of
Israel. The wind has seized it with its wings, 1) that is, they are
carried away by the wind like a bird that is carried away by force,
\"going away\" in the impetuosity of their wings.

1\) Erlanger: malis instead of: inaHs.

Fornication 2c. It is a figurative speech. The wings of Israel were the
prophets and kings, which he called shields 2c. It indicates that
alliance of the prophets, the kings and the people. But still \"their
altars will become sin and shame\". You see now also this alliance of
the clergy and the people; \"is hung in one another\" 2c.

**The fifth chapter.**

In the fifth chapter, he will deal with a special service. The prophet
did not write this at once and at the same time, nor did he preach it in
one and the same year. The Assyrian captivity happened while Hosea was
still alive. He prophesied for a long time, almost forty years and more.
If this is taken into account, the understanding of the prophecy is all
the easier 2c.

**V. 1. Hear now this 2c.**

Like ses\] \"shall not be there\". 2) This is a magnificent speech, it
demands attentive listeners. In no book of the kings the history is
described 2c. One sees that they made a council to set up a new idolatry
to propitiate God against the king of Assyria, who was already in the
country 2c., \"wanted to pretend to be pious\", while they should have
kept the law of God and his word, and not set up a new worship 2c.
Seeing this, the prophet is prompted \[to cry out against them\] 3) 2c.
Full of spirit and boldness, this speech of the prophet chastises. -
\"Who have become a snare to Mizpah.\" That this \[Mizpah\] must be the
proper name of a place, none of the interpreters saw. \"Is this not a
tentation?\" Mizpah is a well-known place and a very famous city 2c.

2\) In the original: \"kient sal nicht do sein. The meaning will be:
Hear now this, how it shall not be with you.

3\) Added by us after the next scripture.

So you must read: \"For you became a rope at Mizpah and a net stretched
out at Thabor.\" One must guess this history, because it is not written
2c. Where something special (res egregia) happens, we set up an idol; so
also the Jews or the Israelites 2c. Because Samuel anointed Saul at
Mizpah, therefore we will set up a new worship here. Of Thabor, a famous
mountain, see the fifth chapter of the book of Judges \[Judges 4:6\]. 4)
That they have established a service there, the prophet says. You have
become a snare and a vexation to all the people because you have
established a new worship service. As if he wanted to say: It was not
enough that you have established worship on the mountains and high
places, now you are establishing a new one 2c.

**V. 2. with battles.**

The prophet speaks with very hateful words. Out of displeasure he calls
it a slaughter or a meat market, he does not deign to call it sacrifice
2c. The Hebrew text has: Aversi profundastis \[XXXXXX XXXX == the

Transgressions have made them deep\^. He means the pretense and the
larva with which they deceived or wanted to deceive the people and the
right prophets 2c. Note: if the popes were intent on reformation, they
would \"deepen\" (profundarent) thus 2c. \"Woe,

4\) Here the Weimar edition has a comma, the Erlangen one no punctuation
mark.

[974 L. XXIV, 32-34. interpretations. On the prophets. 975]{.underline}

who want to be hidden\" (qui estis profundi corde), says Isaiah \[Cap.
29, 15.\]. - Et aversi victimas fecistis profundas \[and in your turning
away you have made the sacrifices profound\], that is, under the very
beautiful semblance of your reformation you hide the sacrifices 2c. and
think that we will be deceived; this will not happen, nor will you
deceive GOD 2c. Therefore, God says, \"Therefore, I must punish them
all,\" as if to say: To the people you will throw a rope, but I will be
an avenger, before me you will not hide.

**V. 3. That Ephraim is now a harlot.**

\"Nor do they do it more.\"

**V. 4. \[They do not think about it.\]**

Instead of cogitationes it would be better: studia. They stay with their
idols and do not think about turning to their God.

**V. 5. Therefore the court of Israel shall be humbled.**

He prophesies of the future calamity. That is, finally the conscience
will come and put it to shame. \"Challenge teaches to remember the
word\" \[Is. 28, 9\], \"it is right for me\", I have well deserved it.
\"Ephraim\" is the tribe, the land. - \"Judah also shall fall.\" This is
to be understood according to the figure of synecdoche: not the whole of
Judah, but a large part shall fall. Above Cap. 1, 7. he said it will not
fall 2c.

V. 6. **But do not find.**

It must be read \[cum gregibus instead of\] 1) in gregibus \[in the
Vulgate\]. He says \[: \"With sheep,\"\] not: with sacrifices; it is
only sheep and cattle 2c. - s \"He turned from them.\"\] From the false
prophets he is taken away by false and ungodly doctrines.

**V. 7. foreign children.**

Idolaters, which is most displeasing to the Lord, that they do not raise
their children in the fear of God, but in idolatry.

1\) Inserted by us. This is what Luther wrote in his Latin translation.

and ignorance of God 2c. - Cum partibus, better: with their corners. -
\"New moon\" (mensis), a definite time for an indefinite one, as if he
wanted to say: \"It is about a moon\", then he will devour them 2c.
Partes are actually called the allotted inheritances, as if he wanted to
say: The king of Assyria will take away both the citizens and the
possessions in one month 2c.

V. 8. **blow trumpets 2c.**

The prophet is dark. From the location of the holy land you know that
Benjamin is in the middle between the tribes of Israel and Judah. Among
the cities of Benjamin these two cities \"Gibeah\" and \"Nama\" are
counted. See the book of Joshua \[Cap. 7, 2.\] after about \"BethAven\"
2c. I do not know if the prophet wants to be understood here 2) 2c. He
seems to me to be speaking here of the utter and general ruin of the
people, both of Israel and Judah 2c. This should be the beginning of a
new chapter. 3) The prophet has in mind that the people of Israel shall
be destroyed both by the Assyrians and the Babylonians, and shall
finally be afflicted in captivity until they go into themselves through
the plague and seek the face of God 2c. Thus he passes from the carnal
kingdom of Israel to the spiritual kingdom of Christ. - BethAven, which
is behind your back, O Benjamin, that is, behind you in the borders of
Judah, 4) \"calls you to (zcu) battle, you may well be.\" He begins with
a glorious summoning of the people, as if he is going to say something
great, namely \[it is

2\) namely \"this or that\", which is not indicated here. The next
following scripture offers: I do not know what the prophet wants to be
understood.

3\) Here still follow in the original (without preceding punctuation
mark) the words: us\^ue aousounre vellet. which we have left
untranslated because we could not get any sense from them. Possibly with
these words the new sentence could begin. The subject of this sentence
would be totus populus.

4\) Here in the manuscript and the printings is still q. 6. - \"as if he
wanted to say\", which seems to us too much, or there is a gap in the
manuscript here. According to the Hallic manuscript and the next
following manuscript, instead of \"ruft\" it is \"Rüstet euch\". The
former offers: Kentoutia: prnepnrattz vos nd bell um; the latter: ut sit
senttzntia: Rüstend üch an stryt.

976 xxiv, 34-37. notes on Hosea, cap. 5, 8-15. 977

1\) your death or destruction and the establishment of the kingdom of
Christ. With the trumpet or with trumpets the people were called
together for the battle.

**V. 9. Ephraim.**

This is the resolution: \"It is over, may cry, whistle\" 2c. \"It will
soon be over, will not return, over, over!\". - Among the tribes of
Israel I will make known (my reliability) (should read\] 2) instead of:
ostendi fidem. Fidem, that is, certainty. \"I will prove that my words
will be true,\" I will show that my prophets have spoken the truth, they
will feel it by experience that I am true in my words: \"I will have
once true.\"

**V. 10. The princes of Judah 2c.**

Now it deals with Judah. - \"Like water,\" that is, exceedingly
abundant.-Assumentes, that is, \"those who move.\" See the passage in
the fifth book of Moses (Cap. 19, 14.) that one should not move the
boundaries of the widows, \"the fence wider, the neighbor\'s closer\"
2c. Judah and Israel had a deadly hatred for each other; they fought on
and on, Judah wanting Israel to be utterly destroyed. The cause of this
was the borders, which soon took these and soon those 2c., as now our
princes fight for land and people 2c. - \"I will pour out.\" \"They
shall also go away.\" It is one and the same final judgment on Judah and
on Israel 2c.

**V. 11. Ephraim suffers violence 2c. (Calumniam etc. )**

This seems to be understood by the people who were in captivity, what
they had suffered there. Now he summarizes both kinds of people. It is
certain that they were treated badly as strangers. \"One must suffer
violence,\" Ephraim is exposed to the violence of all. - (\"It serves
him right.\" (Vulg. Fractus judicio.)) Fractus, that is, crushed, that
is, whose

1\) Inserted by us.

2\) Inserted by us.

Right no one judges, if he also has just cause. \"Must rather be
crushed\" as is now done with the poor even in righteous causes. - \"For
he hath given himself\" 2c. Quia coepit abire post praeceptum, so the
Jews take it, but I stay for the time being with Jerome, who reads
(instead of praeceptum\] sordes. And it is the opinion: He suffers
violence and has no continuation of his cause and his right, because
they follow their impurity and pure filth. It reads harshly: \"According
to the commandment of men\", but better is: sordes, \"becomes a pagan\".

**V. 12. I am a moth to Ephraim.**

That is, I consume them daily, like a moth, as they become heathens
every day.

**V. 13. And when Ephraim felt his sickness.**

The punishments we feel, the guilt rarely. Ephraim sees its sickness,
but it does not feel its blight; it does not know how to remedy its
pain. Instead of vinculum (in the Vulgate) would be better, \"wounds\"
(dolorem).-\"Went Ephraim to Asshur.\" Ephraim sees his misery and joins
with the king of Assyria, \"that is, Gracious Junker,\" I will do what
you will. Here one must counsel (divinandum). The king of Assyria is
called \"the king of Jareb\", either of a city or of a castle 2c. He
(Ephraim) sent envoys for help (to the king,) (where we have (instead
of: \"Jareb\", in the Vulgate) ultorem). 3) As if to say, \"But he could
not help you\" 2c. I will gnaw you and consume you and you shall feel no
help 2c.

**V. 14. For I am as a lion to Ephraim.**

As if he wanted to say: Mine is the punishment. I, who am otherwise a
gentle savior and merciful, am a lioness and a young lion to you; with
impetuosity I will execute the punishment on you. - \"I, I tear them\"
is how the word \"I\" is repeated in Hebrew.

**V. 15. Again I will go to my place.**

That is, I have been with you, you have had my prophets, the law and all
2c.

3\) These brackets are set by us.

978 L. Lxiv. 37f. Interpretations on the prophets. 979

Now I will depart from you, you shall have no prophets until Christ,
neither in captivity nor after, and I will leave you. Then the
traditions began to reign. - \"Until they realize their guilt.\" Until
you condemn yourselves

or judge, that is, until you feel your iniquities and your guilt, and
so, since your iniquities oppress you, seek my face. What follows is
about the kingdom of Christ; now is the transition from captivity to the
kingdom of Christ 2c.

**The sixth chapter.**

**\[V. 1. If they are in trouble, they will have to look for me early\]
1)**

They will make up early, they will seek me early. \"Early do\" \[in
Hebrew\] (manicabat), 2) is a unique (unica) expression. Not otherwise
than in affliction will this people come to me. \"Early,\" that is,
quickly and with haste. \"He who looks early is eager to go up.\" -
Instead of: Quia ipse cepit^3^ ) it should read, \"For he hath rent us,
and will also heal us,\" 2c. \"The kingdom of Christ begins\" is not
taught by the law (lex), but by the knowledge of the new doctrine. The
law does not teach that one should turn to God who smites, but that one
should flee from the wrathful God 2c.

**V. 2. 4) He makes us alive.**

He talks about the resurrection of Christ. This is how we allow it to
be, we want to accept it. Paul boasts of this passage, as he says \[1
Cor. 15, 4.\] that Christ should rise again on the third day. It is
exceedingly glorious, therefore it cannot be understood by the carnal
kingdom of Judah. He does not say, He shall rise again after 2c., but,
\"He maketh alive.\" This will bring about his resurrection 2c. - \"That
we may live before him.\" Life, but in a right life.

1\) This part of the 15th verse of the fifth chapter forms the beginning
of the sixth chapter in the Vulgate.

2\) naanieabat is a word formed (from mans) by Luther, in the way as
elsewhere: ZoiäseNirüsäLkti ms.

3\) In the Weimar edition: oosxit instead of: ospit in the Vulgate and
in the Erlanger.

4\) This is the beginning of the third verse in the Vulgate. The last
part of the first verse in our Bible is the second verse there.

**V. 3. Then we will take heed (sciemus).**

Here will be knowledge. - \"And be diligent.\" Peraequemur, \"to
pursue\"; this is not the pursuit of the Law and the synagogue, but of
the new people. \"Pursue after him,\" says the Psalm \[Ps. 34:15.\] We
shall stop that we may know \[the Lord\] more and more.- Quasi
diluculum. Best \"the dawn\" or \"like the dawn\" that is about to break
forth. 2 Sam. \[23, 4. Vulg.\]: \"As the dawn shines forth\" 2c. So it
is said in the Psalm \[Ps. 19, 6.\]: \"She rejoices 5) like a hero.\" He
wants to say: Thus his (ejus) knowledge will rise through the gospel,
like the dawn, which is not hindered. His, namely Christ\'s, coming
forth is like the dawn, \"which cometh to pass,\" 6) His going forth is
fixed and ordered, \"which is sure and cometh to pass.\" 6)-\"And will
come to us\" 2c. \"This is also all too high\"; this happens through the
tradition of the Gospel, through which we know God. - Instead of
temporaneus \[in the Vulgate\] is better matutinus \[early rain\]. This
cannot be understood otherwise than from the preaching of the Gospel.
The word of the Evangelii is a late rain, because it is a word of the
cross; an early rain, because it is a word of comfort and refreshment.
This would be the secret interpretation of the latter rain and the
former rain.

**V. 4. How will I do you so well 2c.**

Nor does he connect these two tribes, as if to say: I preach to you the
evan-

5\) Erlanger: RxuItarU instead of: sxultavit.

6\) In the original and in the prints: \"go\".

**980** L- xxiv, 38-io. notes on Hosea, Cap. 6, 4-9. **981**

gelium, \[otherwise\] 1) \"you will not become pious\". If I do not
preach, you remain the same 2c. - \"Grace,\" which is the benefit
promised to you and now shown. - \"A thau cloud of the morning,\" which
drives away the sun. \"A dew,\" namely, which the sun \"licks up.\" As
if to say: You let grace be preached to you in vain; it is yours, but
you do not pay attention to it.

**V. 5. Therefore I court them through the prophets**

(Dolavi).

\"Planed\" by the prophets, as if he wanted to say: That which I have
done by the prophets is for the purpose of judging that ye are dead and
must be planed, that I may bring you into a figure, that I may teach you
that ye are sinners, and bring you to repentance; but nothing has been
directed. - Judicia, \"right,\" or teaching, as if to say: I have willed
to teach this 2) by the prophets, that your right, which you should have
received by the prophets, should \"burst forth\" like the sun 2c. So it
is said in Isaiah \[Cap. 26, 9. 51, 4.\] that the right should finally
come to light on the whole earth.

**V. 6. For I delight in love and not in sacrifice.**

With one word he does all ceremonies, just like Isaiah \[Cap. 1, 11\].
It can be taken for the love that has been shown \[to us by God\] and
for the love that is to be shown \[by us to the next\]. - Instead of
scientiam it would be better: \"knowledge\". 4)

**V. 7. But they transgress the covenant 2c.**

\"They let pass\", they do as their father did, who transgressed the
covenant he had accepted. So they have transgressed my covenant, that
is, because they do not believe.

1\) Inserted by us.

2\) Instead of voluit we have accepted volui\...

3\) Added by us according to the \'Relation in the following scripture.

4\) This last sentence is in the editions only after v. 7; in the Hall
manuscript in the correct place.

They have acted unfaithfully, namely by committing adultery with idols.

**V. 8. for Gilead is a city 2c.**

\"This is a heavy text.\" It is also corrupted, and that translation
\[in the Vulgate\] is worth nothing: Supplantata \[sanguine\], rather:
She sought blood. And \[v. 9. instead of particeps sacerdotum it should
read:\] 5) the society or covenant of the priests is like the maw of
robbers. Pergentes de \[v. 9.\] is too much. \"Gilead,\" is not a city,
but the name of a whole tract of country. The prophet names the whole
synagogue by this word; he speaks of the kingdom and the priesthood. See
Jer. 21 or 22 \[v. 6\]. The more distinguished part of the people, the
kings and the priests, the prophets call \"Gilead,\" where those are
gathered with whom the testimony is, namely, with ruling and teaching;
the heap 6) of the testimony which is to teach others. By priests he
understands 2c. - Instead of idolum is to be read misethat. He ascribes
to the great ones that they shed blood, and so he ascribes to them the
work. Therefore it is better to read: who sought blood, as now follows.

**V. 9: And the priests with their multitude are like the roosters.**

See what Jerome says here. The same is in Jeremiah \[Cap. 23, 9. ff.\].
Therefore, Sichem is 2c. Between Shechem and Jerusalem, I believe, was a
grove and a forest in which robbers hid. The gospel of Christ confirms
this in Lucas \[Cap. 10, 30.\] to thine that lay half dead 2c. The
meaning is taken from the likeness of robbers, as they are wont to do
2c. Such people are my priests, who deal in wicked doings 2c. We have
drawn this text to the time after the resurrection of Christ, when the
apostles suffered many things from the persecutors for the sake of
Christ. It is only a likeness; the Christians were killed because they
wanted to go to the true God. - Instead of

5\) Added by us.

6\) Instead of 6urnulu8 (as the Weimar edition suggests) turnnlus is to
be read according to Gen. 31, 48.

982 n. xxiv, 40-42. interpretations on the prophets. 983

latronum \[\"ströter\"\] is men of war \[in Hebrew\]. The Hebrew word
actually means the one who is prepared for war. Elsewhere it means the
robbers (latrunculi) of Syria \[2 Kings 6:23. in the Vulg. latrones\],
that is, men of war on foot, \"footmen,\" \"footfolk.\" Fauces \[maw\]
is the name, because they want to devour and ruin the Christians by
force 2c.

**V. 11. But Judah will still 2c.**

This is a very dark passage if we follow Jerome\'s interpretation. It
must be understood from the bringing back from the new and spiritual
captivity 2c. \"But Judah will yet\", that is, you will have the glory
of the gospel and will turn many to you 2c.

**The seventh chapter.**

\"This is also a dark chapter.\" The opinion is briefly this: He seems
to be dealing with the fact that, since he had punished until now and
might have brought both the king and the people to repentance, he is
confronted by the false prophets who stir up the people against the good
prophet and make the word vain, as is also happening now. Hereupon he
comes \"on baking\", he becomes a baker or bread kneader (pinsor), as if
he wanted to say: With your teachings you will bring it to the point
that the people will provoke God to anger, and Ephraim will become what
the Assyrian can eat from 2c.

**V. 1. If I will heal Israel.**

Namely, from the idolatry through my prophets, \"the people had almost
been brought to justice\", but the princes of Samaria \"cause a new
calamity\", a new lie, instruct the people how they should behave
against the Lord and how they should seek peace with the Assyrian. No
one instructs the people to trust 2c. - \"For though they be troubled
among themselves with thieves\" 2c. This seems to me the prophet is
referring to the godless teachers. They disguise themselves into an
angel of light 2c., \"thieves go in and murderers go out.\" He also
accuses them of theft and robbery. So I can say of our priests: as
thieves they go in, as murderers they go out; one should give against
the Turk 2c. And he does not speak of the adversaries who enter in any
way 2c. The ungodly doctrines judge corrupters

They are in the conscience as well as in the goods. And they do not even
think that I have all their evil before my eyes, they act securely and
present their lies 2c. \"just \[as\] if the Lord were dead\" and not
even watching 2c.

**V. 2. Yet they will not notice 2c.**

Forte \[in the Vulgate\] is to be erased. That is, they do not even
consider that I remember all their wickedness. - \"Which they do
everywhere\" \[Nunc circumdederunt etc.). \"Through and through again,
around and around,\" that is, everywhere there is such activity among
them, and I have them before my eyes. With these beautiful lies they
smear the mouths of the kings and the people, as in the day is with the
indulgence 2c. They have all the right names, pretenses and appearances,
that the Turks must be subdued and the brethren liberated. This is a
lie.

V. 3. **They put off the king by their wickedness 2c.**

This is so that the king will not grieve over his sins and turn to
repentance; the evil prophets turn him away 2c. They comfort them, they
make them obdurate, so that the kings do not recognize their sins. The
princes also serve them for a mockery. These make the princes confident,
and they hear these people gladly 2c.; and this is done so that it may
come to light that the word is protected by the power of GOD and stands
by its own power, lest they boast that they receive it by their power.

[984 L- xxiv, 42-45. notes on Hosea, Cap. 7, 4-10. 985]{.underline}

V. 4. **and are all adulterers 2c.**

\"A heavy text.\" - A coquente, better: that the Becker heats. We want
to see if we can \"hit\". That is, all, the princes and the people, are
turned away, they commit adultery, namely spiritual. \"Like\" indicates
a like. Clibanus, a baked rose, heated by the becker, is the likeness of
their adultery 2c. The ungodly teachers are heating this oven, that is,
they are setting the heart of this people on fire to cling to the
foolish lie that these people brought up against the prophet Hosea. -
Instead of quievit it should read: He has stopped working the kneaded
dough until it is leavened. 1)-Note the manner and form of preparation
for baking 2c. The whole likeness is taken from the baker. He speaks of
bread for food (cibario), not of delicious bread (regio) 2c.; he speaks
of common bread, \"Freßbrod\", not for pleasure 2c. The godless teachers
are the baker. - The heart is the oven. It is kindled that marriage may
be broken with you, \"kneading\" is as living as the heart is kindled by
false teaching. \"Standing the dough and running out\" is to expect the
king of Assyria until through lies and false persuasions the whole
nation is caught, that is, the nation believes you and lives so until it
is all leavened. Paululum is not in the Hebrew. That inflaming makes you
puffed up and confident 2c.

V. 5. **Today is the feast of our king 2c.**

As if he wanted to say: You do this baking on the feast day of the king,
that is, on the day of our king you did all this, when the princes began
to become mad from the wine, the princes, namely, inflamed by you. -
This is how he (the king) draws the scoffers to him,\" that is, the
false prophets who deceive the people.

1\) Here already, at least erroneously, in the manuscript and in the
prints the first half of the fifth verse is given as keyword. The remark
made about xuululurn is in particular proving; this stands in the fourth
verse. - \"The heart\" is highlighted as a keyword in the prints and is
labeled \"v. 6.\" by the Erlanger in the margin. This is inverted. \"The
oven\" is Subject; the heart, the spiritual interpretation of the same,
is Predicate. All this belongs to the fourth verse.

**V. 6. But their becker sleeps all night.**

That is, meiue (namely the false) prophets are now safe, like a Becker,
\"who has preserved\". - \"Of the morning,\" that is, in the following
time, when all are persuaded. The meaning is clear 2c. The king of
Assyria \"shall eat the cake and the bread\".

V. 7. **They are still so hot with devotion 2c.**

Hosea, \"the liar there,\" said that we will perish; that is nothing. -
\"The judges,\" who judge rightly, \"must perish.\" - \"All their
kings,\" as if to say, \"Is it not a pity\" that all kings fall? \"they
all fall.\" They cry out under my name, but not to me 2c.

**V. 8. Ephraim.**

This is the application of the parable: Ephraim is mixed among the
nations, \"everyone eats him\", and he is scattered everywhere. Instead
of subcinericius, it is better to put common bread (cibarius); that is,
Ephraim has become the food of all nations, especially of the king of
Assyria. - \"Which no one turns over\", that is, with which no change
takes place 2c., always it is eaten.

**V. 9. but strangers devour his strength 2c.**

That is, everything that was in his forces 2c. of wine, of land, of
grain, \"eat other people\". - Instead of nescit is to read: \"he does
not recognize it\", that is, he is close to his downfall, \"it is over,
has lived its best time\".

**V. 10: And the hope of Israel is humbled before their eyes (Et
humiliabitur etc.).**

Thus it says above \[Cap. 5, 5. Vulg.\]: Et respondebit superbia in
facie ejus. Both \[both humiliabitur and humiliabitur can stand.
Respondebit I like better: \"to say one thing after another,\" to say
alternately; that is what the Hebrew word means. One humiliation after
another will follow 2c. - \"They are not yet converted\" 2c. The
prophets did everything for the sake of the first commandment and faith
2c. As the highest sin the prophets punish unbelief, as now 2c. - \"In
all this.\" Although Israel was torn apart, and its wickedness was
brought before its an-

986 L. XXIV, 4S-47. interpretations On the Prophets. 987

it has not returned to the Lord 2c. Note how it went with the godless
king Ahaz: the more he was beaten, the more altars he erected 2c. So do
ours 2c. We have heaped sin upon sin when we would avert and forbid the
plagues.

**V. 11. For Ephraim is we a tempted dove 2c.**

That is, easily seduced and persuaded, or simple-minded, that is,
seduced by its false prophets and not judging their teachings. Behold,
the cause of all error. We are yet a dove that believeth easily; we
believe men, GOtte not likewise 2c. He adds: \"who does not want to
notice anything\" (sine corde), otherwise it would be a praiseworthy
tractability (persuasio). Thus our popes have taken away from us the
paying attention (cor), they have taken away from us the judging and
reserved the same for themselves. \"Now they call Egypt\", namely after
the advice of the godless prophets and guided by their own unbelief and
godlessness. 1) But why not the Lord? 2) Because they are persuaded by
the false prophets 2c., that is, they trust in human advice, which is
against the first commandment 2c.

**V. 12. But as they run to and fro 2c.**

Everything is figuratively spoken. \"Let them go.\" When they will sit
in safety and seem to reign, I will pull them down 2c. Unawares a bird
is caught 2c. Suddenly I will bring the king of Assyria upon them, and
bring them where they cannot escape. - \"I will punish them\" 2c. This
is a grand making of the same prophecy and a repetition. In the whole
fourth chapter he prophesies against the return of the people. 3) This
is a dark passage? This

1\) Instead of impE we have assumed imxiotatis.

2\) Erlanger: äsna instead; äomsinuir\^.

3\) The following to: \"that they will be brought captive to Assyria\"
is added in the manuscript under the same keyword in Cap. 8, 4. with the
remark: okmissuin \[st in xra666\<l6nti capits. - Both the Erlangen and
Weimar editions (p. 38s) erroneously refer to it as an addendum to
\"oav. 7 v. II\", but the latter has it here in the correct place as a
note.

Preaching (auditus) can be taken in an active and in a suffering way. I
do not dislike Jerome\'s opinion, namely: \"I will punish them as one
preaches (secundum auditionem) in their gathering\", that is, I will
chastise them, 4) because they rather hear each other than me, and have
made idols after the manner of their gatherings and communities. It can
also stand in a suffering way, namely like this: 5) I will chastise
them, as has been heard in their gathering, that is, according to my
word, which I have threatened them 2c. So \[stands auditus also\] Isa.
53, 1. and Habakkuk \[Cap. 3, 1.\] 2c., according to the rumor, or
according to that which has been said in their bands. But it has been
preached that they will be taken captive to Assyria 2c.

**V. 13. woe to them that they depart from me\]. 6)**

\"To depart from God is to worship God with a worship other than the
right worship. As long as this sin of idolatry remains, I will destroy
it. I am the redemption of Israel, who redeem and have often redeemed
this people; from me it should also proceed; they deceive and deceive me
2c. So also the Holy Spirit is charged (cogitur) that he has done many
things on the concilia 2c.

**V. 14. Neither do they call upon me from the heart.**

\"I should be the GOD\" who led them back, and whom they should call
2c., but they take refuge elsewhere 2c. You listen well to me, but you
do not call, namely \"from the heart\" 2c. There is no faith; with your
works and your doings you cry out, which is only a mere howling and a
\"tumult\" (tumultus), since the holy word of God is sung without the
heart being present. This alone is seen by the prophetic spirit 2c. -
\"They gather for the sake of grain and moses\" 2c. Note that this
passage also often

4\) In the manuscript: knZmirn (which is also offensive to the Weimar),
for which we have assumed eaMZabo sos after the next writing.

5\>. The colon, which stands in front of it in our template, we have put
after it. - Immediately following we have assumed suru instead of eos.

6\) This piece has drawn \"di\" Weimarsche still with to V. 12.

988 **L. XXIV, 47-49.** notes on Hosea, Cap. 7, 14-16. 989

\[perverted\] is drawn to the sacrament of the altar. But see their
righteousness 2c. - Ruminabant \[in the Vulgate\] I want to be taken as
a word which means \"to gather.\" \"For grain 2c. sake,\" that is, their
striving is that they seek only temporal things; their ungodly and
unbelieving clamor seeks not my glory, but their belly, that they may
have abundance on the earth. Ps. 4, 8.: They have plenty of grain and
wine, they become great 2c., \[they are glad\] \"if they have to eat and
drink\", but I rejoice from the heart 1) 2c. They worship the belly as a
god and leave me. - Instead of recesserunt, they depart from 2) me, is
better: they flee me.

V. 15. **I teach them.**

This is a grandstanding of the same unbelief: I do it and should do it,
but they teach themselves with new doctrines and laws. They seek Pharaoh
and other kings, human help. - \"But they think evil of me.\" What they
think against the prophet, they also think against God. They do nothing
but condemn the teaching of the prophet and establish their own 2c. I am
ready to teach them, to save them, to protect them, but they are ready
to teach themselves 2c., \"rejecting me\".

V. 16. **they are converted. 3)**

Instead of reversi sunt, it should read revertuntur. - Absque jugo or
\"free,\" that is, they turn away of their own free will, so as not to
be under me, so as not to suffer my word. Hence comes children Belial,
\"unruly kin-.

1\) These words: Keä laetor in eorcis etc. are erroneously highlighted
as a new keyword in the Erlangen and Weimar editions, but they refer to
the Psalm passage just mentioned (Vulg. Ps. 4, 7.).

2\) In deelilinnt ras, as the Erlanger has done, an a will never have to
be put in front of it.

3\) In the Vulgate, to which the interpretation refers, this verse reads
thus: Reversi \[nnb, ut esssut ubsMAO, iueti 8UQt Hunsl nrons äolosus,
eaäent in Siuäio xrinoiptzs sorum, u knrors linAULS 8NÄ6. I8tu
sudsumiubio sorurn in tsrra

that is, they do not want to submit in faith to my counsel and be
subject to me. - \"A false bow.\" This is a figure of speech in
Scripture. It is more common in the prophets for the Lord to call his
people 4) a bow, a preacher an arrow, as in the Psalm. We are a bow of
the Lord, when we walk in his word as it were in weapons, when he fights
through us against the unbelievers and the godless. Then we are called
his bow, he fights through his word. Therefore we are both bow and
arrow. They become a false bow against me. Those through whom I should
have dealt with ungodliness, they turn their pretensions against
godliness. \"A deceitful bow,\" because the appearance is there as if
they were fighting for godliness, but under this appearance they are
fighting against godliness 2c., that is, a deceitful instrument, of
which I should have made use against ungodliness, they turn that under a
good appearance against godliness. - \"They shall fall,\" 2c., namely,
because they let me call in vain, and fight against godliness, not only
the people shall fall, but also the elect, kings 2c. -

A furore, from the wrath of their tongue. This may be referred either to
God, from the evil which he inflicts on them by their tongue 2c., that
is, their ungodly tongue is a wrath of God 2c., or to the fact that the
wrath of princes is against his people 2c. - Ista subsannatio, \"there
will be a mockery of it,\" as it is said in the Psalm \[Ps. 79, 4.\]
Those who did not put their hope in God are the \"Junkers\" who relied
on Egypt 2c. Everywhere \"they will be mocked\". I do not like Jerome\'s
opinion here 2c. He has to do with the fact that he would like to raise
up the people to faith and to draw them away from the apparent service
of God 2c. The \"unholy appearance\" makes hypocrites.

4\) In the original: in xopnluin 8nnm. We consider that in is too much.
In the following writing it is not.

[990 L. LX1V, 4S-S1. Interpretations on the prophets. 991]{.underline}

**The eighth chapter.**

Here again the Spirit admonishes the prophet to stop and continue
because the people are in godlessness and all too much outward
appearance of worship.

**V. 1. shout loudly like a trumpet 2c. (In gutture). 1)**

In Isaiah \[Cap. 58, 1.\] this figure of speech is, \"Lift up thy voice
like a trumpet\" 2c. \"Run to, it burns,\" shout, shout, and the more
you are hindered, the more you shout 2c. - \"Like an eagle.\" I do not
know what this is. What Jerome says is cold and twisted and violent. I
\[understand it\] thus (whether there might be a connection): 2) that
thou be a trumpet, and shout over the people, as an eagle over the house
of the LORD 2c. \"I know not what it is, will let it go.\" 3) The words
of a threat are used to be emitted in such a way that something is left
out in the speech (per apocope). It is all elliptical. As if to say,
\"Beware,\" there is such a great persecution coming that even this holy
place will not be spared 2c. There will be a king who will be inflamed
with such great wrath that he will not spare the house of GOD in
Jerusalem. Of such great wrath is GOD aroused. -Pro eo or:
\"therefore.\" They do not want the good, so they may have the evil, as
if he wanted to say: Ephraim \"wants to have misfortune\", we say:
\"rings after misfortune\". - \"And turn aside from my law,\" namely, by
serving idols.

**V. 2. \[Will they then cry out to me.\]**

\[Instead of invocabunt in the Vulgate\] he read: invocant.^4^ . 4) -
\"We know you, Israel.\" The

1\) Vulgate: In Zutturo tun sit tudn quasi aquila super ftomum Domini,
pro so etc..

2\) These brackets are set by us.

3\) The following to \"ringet nach Unglück\" is inserted in the
manuscript as an addendum in verse 4. with the remark: 3am \[squitur oa.
8 etc., under the same keyword: Huasi Aquila.

4\) This is to be regarded as a remark of the postscript. The Weimar
edition has drawn this to v. 1,

means we are your people 2c. The Lord leads their words 5) 2c.

**V. 3. Israel rejects the good.**

What is it that they call so only with words? 2c. But what do they do?
They reject the good, they reject what I teach, \"reject it\", so much
is missing that they should hear. They are lies, therefore cry out
mightily against this \[false\] appearance 2c.

**V. 4. \[They set princes, and I must not know**

\[Instead of: Principes exstiterunt in the Vulgate\] better: Principes
facti sunt, \"have become princes, and I know nothing about it, one king
always strangles the other\". See in the second book of Kings \[Cap. 15,
10. 14. 23. 30.\] 6), among five kings none died a bloodless (sicca)
death. This refers to the five last kings who inflicted death among
themselves. I, GOD, am the King of this people, and they set kings and
princes for themselves; \"shall I not also know something about it?\"
7) - \[\"They make kings.\"\] Ipsi regnaverunt; better: they have,
become kings without me, they have become princes 2c. GOD wanted this
people to be ruled by his word, that\'s why the prophets were given, but
this wanted to \"set up\" a new way, and they anoint themselves and make
themselves kings rc. 8) - \"Out of their silver and gold.

while the Erlangen edition already has the second verse begin with the
last remark of the previous verse. The Weimar edition, on the other
hand, has labeled the next remark, which still belongs to the second
verse, with \"3.

6\) Instead of alloZorat (there is no such word) we have assumed
atloZat. \^.HsZorisat would not make sense.

6\) The Weimar edition erroneously has \"so. 10

7\) Here follows in the original the addendum to Cap. 7, 12 that we
inserted above. Likewise, the addendum to V. 1 of this chapter that we
included at the appropriate place. The Weimar edition has relegated both
additions to notes, but the Erlangen edition has left them here.

8\) This note, which in any case belongs to the text here, has been
relegated to the notes by the Weimar edition, as if it were also a
supplement to Cap. 7, 12.

992 xxiv, 5i-5s. Notes on Hosea, Cap. 8, 4-7. 993

they make idols\" 2c. \[Ut interirent\] that is, they seek \"that they
may perish.\" 1)

**V. 5. Your calf, Samaria, he rejected.**

I believe he calls \"the calf of Samaria\" the calf at BethAven. Note
what is said above about Jezreel, the city of Israel. Samaria was the
head of the kingdom, where both estates \^the spiritual and the secular
were. I do not believe they raised up a new calf. - \"He cast out.\" He
prophesies that the kingdom shall be destroyed: That worship and all
Samaria, both the kings and the people, \"shall all go to the gallows.\"
It is a diminishing speech (tapinosis) in the word \"calf\". He does not
consider it worthy of the name of God, as if he wanted to say: \"It will
go to the God like you. The God shall recompense them.\" - \"They must
be punished.\" 2) Emundari, that is, to become innocent, blameless, that
is, when will it be that they will be without guilt and offense(Ps. 19,
14.: \"And remain innocent \[emundabor\] of great iniquity\"), that they
will have a good and undefiled reputation 2c.? I must be angry\' and
destroy them, because the iniquity will have no end.

**V. 6. the calf (Ipse). 3)**

Namely, their God, whom they invented. This God did not make Israel, but
Israel made him. He is a creature, not a creator, therefore the creature
must perish with the creator. The work of our hands is called an idol
\[Ps. 115:4\]. Everything that we do in that invented and imagined
service of God is the work of our hands 2c. Free will makes nothing but
idols because it wants to act in divine things. GOD wants to form, not
be formed; that is \[when GOD forms,\] to be born of GOD, but here he
says: Israel made this God. - \"A workmaster.\" He interprets himself.
With contemptuous words

1\) It seems to us that instead of: srnirn etc. better:

ut intcrircut would be set as a keyword. - The next following note is in
Weimar\'s still drawn to v. 4.

2\) Vulgate: Usauccmo non potucrnnt crnunckari?

3\) Neither the Erlangen nor the Weimar editions have recognized this
\"Ipsc\" as a new keyword; therefore, both have added the following
interpretation consecutively to the fifth verse.

He calls this presumption 2c. Their actions and their heart he reproves
and punishes, namely the trust in that service of God, which they
perform. Where the trust is, there is God, where the treasure is, there
is the heart 2c. So it is with the cap of the monks, with the fasts 2c.
The service of God he calls their God. The gold was their worship, so it
is their god. - \[\"Therefore the calf of Samaria shall be
pulverized.\"\] 4) \[Instead of:\] Quoniam etc: he \[Luther\] read
differently: Quum in aranearum. Hebrew it is called shabab \[XXXX\].
Schabab

\"become\" 5) like the chips and cuttings of wood, which is refuse, that
is, the god of Samaria is Shabab, will become refuse, that is, he will
be made into nothing.

**V. 7. for they sow wind 2c. (Quia ventum etc.)**

He \[Luther\] read differently: Quoniam etc. 6) It is a figurative
speech. \"Still weather\" require both sowing and reaping. \"They sow
wind,\" \"will also reap storm or tempest.\" It was perhaps a very
general saying among the people. So it can be said of our monks
proverbially: they sow wind, they will reap thunderstorms; the fruit of
their labor is trembling and trembling of conscience. A foolish work, a
ruinous reward or fruit: evil they worship, evil they serve GOD,
therefore they will receive bad reward, that is, your hope will come to
shame, according to which you hope to serve GOD and receive good from
GOD 2c., but you will be destroyed. - \[\"Your seed shall not come
up.\"\] Culmus stans, *chama* \[XXX\], better: The seed.

on your stalks (eulmi 8taut68), that is, all you fruit will perish.

4\) Vulgate: Huoninra in arÄNSurnrn keins crit vitu1ns Lainnrine (for to
cobwebs shall the calf of Samaria become). In Luther\'s Latin
translation: läso in krustra ooinrninnstnr vitnlns Lnrrmrine.

5\) In the original: were.

6\) Here Luther\'s Latin translation: \^noniurn instead of yniu in the
Vulgate. It seems to us conspicuous that both in the previous note and
here the same words are repeated after the keyword, namely: Huoninin
etc. niitcr IcZit. We assume that the copyist who prepared the Zwickau
manuscript inserted these words in the former place by mistake, and
therefore they should be deleted there.

32

9942 xxiv, 53-S5. Interpretations on the prophets. 995

expected. And this can be understood figuratively and without image, and
best of all in such a way that the Assyrian king will come and take away
all the seeds 2c. This beautiful picture serves for us 2c.

**V. 8. Israel will be eaten up.**

That is, the king of Assyria will come and devastate and consume
everything 2c. This is a prophetic word, namely, that it will happen. -
\"As with an unworthy vessel.\" An unclean vessel, \"as with a
Bruuzschirb,\" 1) a vessel which we hold of no honor. According to the
Hebrew it is better given by \"a vessel of dishonor\"; so Paul calls it
sim second letter to Timothy \[Cap. 2, 20.\].

**V. 9. Therefore they run up to Assyria.**

That is, they have been guided and forced to go out. - \"A wild\"
onager, \"wild ass.\" Among other characteristics, this one is also very
well known, that he lives solitary, as Job says, and loves solitude, far
from the servitude of men 2c. The wild donkeys are also known for their
thirst. He describes the customs of the people 2c. And he says another
thing: \"The Junker\" Ephraim is not \"my hereditary donkey\", but he
wants to be free, he does not want to be oppressed by my law 2c., but
since I am rejected and not taken for GOD, so they go lonely, and I
leave them without pasture 2c. - \[\"Ephraim gives to the wooers.\"\]
Munera etc., that is, pay, that is, they leave me, they are gods to
themselves, they ally themselves with the heathen, \"give money
enough,\" and think that they will stand firm and remain 2c. They want
to arm themselves with their money. - Sed et cum mercede 2) is not in
the text, but so: Even among the heathen 2c. - \"Booers,\" he calls the
allies with whom they worshipped the idol. 3)

1\) In the original: \"brunschirb\". Compare Tischreden, St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XXII, 1700, No. 97: \"Brunntzschirbel\" (chamber pots).

2\) With these words v. 10. begins in the Vulgate. Keck 6t belongs to
this keyword. The Erlanger and Weimar editions have it at the end of the
preceding note.

3\) This note should have preceded the previous one.

**V. 10. Now I will gather these same nations over them.**

\"Will bring them together finely.\" As many of them join together, I
will make \"a cake\" out of it, \"which the Assyrian will eat.\" -
\[\"They shall grow weary of the burden.\"\] (Quiescent.) The verbum
here means to be in need of birth. So it is often in the Psalms \[Ps.
29, 9.\]: \"He arouses the hinds\" (conturbat cervas). 4) Likewise Paul,
Rom. 8, 22. And they shall be afflicted with the interest and drudgery
of princes for a little while longer, namely, until the king of Assyria
comes, they shall be afflicted. First they shall drain you with
interest, \"toiling and estimating, after that\" I will also take them
away 2c., \"life and limb.\" So it also happens to us.

**V. 11: For Ephraim has made many altars to sin.**

Read like this: He is served by the altars for sinning. The more I
preach, the more they set up altars. Not only are you setting up altars
for sin, but you are also sinning. And so it comes 2c.

**V. 12. If I write to him equally much of the law.**

\[What the Vulgate offers: Scribam ei multiplices leges meas\] also this
is dark. It should read like this: Even if I write my law to him more
often, that is, if I give my name 5) in writing, as it were, I still do
not judge anything, but \[my laws\] are respected by him as foreign.

**V. 13. That they now sacrifice much 2c.**

See the seventh chapter of Jeremiah. \"Let me be undone with your
sacrifices.\" You may

4\) For Hiphil from \^n, Luther, as can be seen from the meaning he
gives, assumed as root word, which is found in the Psalm passage we give
and several times. This has caused us to conjicir oe?\'uas instead of
eerras, which the Erlanger äanslesen from the original, and terrus,
which the Weimarsche offers.

5\) In our template: si äoseriptuua

ovaniuna bunr, which seems to us to be completely meaningless. Instead
of oranium 6um we have assumed\^noruen U26UM. This Conjectur receives
great probability by what the following writing offers here: ulluä 86mx
\"6r Nomen iliäunt.

[996 xxiv, sö-57. notes on Hosea, cap. 8, 13. 14. 9, 1-4.
997]{.underline}

bring me sacrifices, they may sacrifice meat and eat it, but that does
not please the Lord. The LORD has nothing to do with the sacrifices, but
is concerned that they hear his voice 2c. - \"But he will remember their
iniquity,\" that they turn to Egypt for help, forsaking their God and
trusting in an arm of the flesh.

V. 14. **Israel forgets its Creator.**

Thus I read. - \"So does Judah\" 2c. Thus must be read, not Judas swhich
the Vulgate has\^j. - Delubra, \"royal houses,\" churches 2c. This is
how the Hebrew reads: they build treacherous castles 2c. They rely on
their own strength to stand 2c. But I will take away both the temple and
them, \"one with the other\".

**The ninth chapter.**

\"But there we have another.\" The prophet still remains with the threat
of future captivity, taking away all confidence from them. Notice the
five kings, Sallum 1) 2c., who killed each other 2c. The prophet turns
his attack against the security in which they stood, since they had made
a covenant with the king of Assyria and with the king of Egypt 2c. No
\[pagan\] nation (gens) changes its god; see also the prophet Jeremiah
\[Cap. 2, III. This is also shown by the histories of the Romans. It is
godliness alone that is changed; ungodliness is constant. As if he
wanted to say: You alone have fornicated against your God, which other
nations do not do.

**V. 1. You must not rejoice, Israel, nor boast as the Gentiles do.**

Thus I read. - \"whore\'s wages\" (mercedem). See above Cap. 2, 12. 2)
You hoped for wages. - Dilexisti etc. The Latin and our way of speaking
requires: \"have liked\" 2c. Loving (diligere, amare) is what the Hebrew
language calls it 2c. But your hope \"will be lacking\" because.

**V. 2. Therefore, the threshing floors 2c. shall be for you.**

Elsewhere it is said: The yield of the oil tree will deceive you, it
will be less

1\) In the original and in the Vulgate: Lellum. Compare Cap. 8, 4.

2\) This passage, which is referred to here, offers almost nothing. In
contrast, the next scripture gives a detailed interpretation for our
passage.

give than was expected; that is it that he says, The winepress shall
deceive thee 2c. God will curse your grain; the yield will not be like
the hope.

**V. 3. Ephraim must return to Egypt.**

Instead of reversus est it is better to say: But Ephraim will dwell 2c.
This shall be thy reward, which thou hast hoped for in thy
threshingfloors, and in all thy cellars. - \"And in Assyria,\" as if to
say, Thither shall it come to pass, that thou shalt not only have no
abundance, but all things shall be unclean unto thee.

**V. 4. They cannot make a drink offering to the Lord.**

He describes what will happen in the Assyrian captivity. The \"drink
offering\" is actually wine. They will not pour out wine to the Lord,
that is, they will not make a drink offering and sacrifice, that is, we
will eat unclean things, and there will be no place for the sacrifice,
because they are not in the land of the Lord. In a land that is not the
Lord\'s, everything that is pleasing to God, which He has commanded,
ceases. He places captivity under their eyes, which is Summa Summarum. -
\"Their sacrifice\" 2c. See in Deut. 5 \[Cap. 26, 11. 14.\]: it was not
permitted for anyone to sacrifice in mourning, the sacrifice demands
cheerfulness and joyful eating 2c. It was an unclean sacrifice if done
in mourning or for the dead. - \"As of the afflicted\" because it is
immediately unclean because of the mourning and sorrow. The

[998 L. XXIV, 57-59. interpretations on the prophets. 999]{.underline}

The Lord hates the sad sacrifices of such people, namely of the
afflicted (lugentium is better than eorum). \"They may well eat\" of
that bread, because it will be food for them, but it will not be a
pleasing sacrifice to the Lord 2c.

**V. 5: What then will you do in the seasons?**

As if to say: Nothing. Moed \[XXXX\] are certain times of the year, as
Pentecost, Easter, Christmas 2c., which are distinguished from the
holidays. The moon is the origin and mother of these times. Paul
translates it by tempus in the Epistle to the Galatians \[Cap. 4, 10.
Vulg.\] Likewise Gen. 1, 14. on the feast days of the Lord, as
Pentecost, Passover 2c.

**V. 6. Egypt 2c.**

There they will be, but they will not dare to do any of these things. -
Lappa is the thistle, a thorn. - \"Their dear idol silver\"
(desiderabile), that is, the beautiful or precious things prepared from
their silver 2c. So much is lacking in it that you could sacrifice and
celebrate feasts there 2c.

**V. 7. The time of visitation has come 2c. 1)**

\"So it \[is\] said: it will be paid one day\" 2c. - Scitote \[stultum
prophetam\]. The

Text is dark, the interpreters \"even\" darker. I interpret it this way,
namely: Then you will know. 2) When this time will have come 2c., \"you
will realize\", that is, then the Israelites will realize \"what a
foolish prophet I have been\". And as a watchman 2c. \[you will
recognize me\], that is, you will recognize \"that I am a true
prophet\". 3) It must be read \[instead of speculator in the Vulgate\]
speculatorem, namely, ye shall know. Ye

1\) Vulgate: Vsusrunt äiss visitatiorüs, vsnsrunt dies rstrivutiouis;
\[sitots Israel stulturn proplietuna, iusauuiu virurn sxirituulsrn,
xroptsr ruultituüiusru iiiiHuitatis tuae, st mnUitnäinsin arnsntias.

2\) It seems to us that instead of soMossits should be read:
soAnossetis. The next following scripture offers iutslliMtis.

3\) This sentence is an addendum inserted in the original at the end of
this paragraph with: \"8uxxls.\".

condemn my prophets, godly and holy men, \"must be your fools\" because
you hate them. The words are spoken by the people to shame against the
prophets, as if he wanted to say: Then I too will scoff, then you will
see \"what a fool I have been\" 2c. I do not like what the Jews say
here, that they now have false prophets as punishment, against whom
Hosea prophesies. - \"This fool\", namely me, who must be their fool. -
\"For your iniquity\'s sake,\" belongs to the word \"fool,\" not to the
verb \"recognize\" \[namely, thus\]: for your sin\'s sake (which I
punish) 4) \"I must be a fool.\" - \"Prophet\" is also an abusive word,
it is an ambiguous word. It is used for honor, rarely also for disgrace,
as happens now. Thus \[they called him\] \"a madman\" or a raging man of
the wind, \"a man who handles loose theidings.\" As Virgil 5) says: a
windy tongue, so it can also be said: a windy man. Thus what follows
\[v. 8.\]: \"a watchman\" has 2c. (all in an active way) has a good
meaning in Scripture, as Ezek. \[Cap. 3, 17.\]; Greek έπίσχοπος*,*
\[Latin\] superintendens, \"watchman, overseer.\" 6)

**V. 8. ropes (Vulg. laqueus).**

Laqueum, that is, whom you out of too great hatred consider a snare,
that I have been a snare to you in all your ways 2c. Here it speaks of
the punishment, not of the guilt. Likewise it must be prophetam, not
propheta. - \[Vias\], namely of the prophet. - Insaniam, or you is
called the prophet. - \[In domo Dei\] ejus, namely of the

4\) This is in the margin.

5\) Vir.\] \^esn., liv. XI, v. 390.

6\) The Erlangen and the Weimar editions have brought everything
preceding from the place where we have inserted the addendum, as
interpretation of the eighth verse, and have regarded the word
KpsoMatOrsrn as keyword. But it is easy to see that this word is only
anticipated there, and that it is the interpretation of the seventh
verse. Because we meet the keywords: 8tMturn, ?roxtsr irncjujtatsna,
kropüsta, lusauurü and the saying: that the words are spoken to the
shame of the prophets, which all points to the seventh verse. One could
start the interpretation of v. 8 with the last sentence, where we have
inserted 8.\^\".

1000 **L. XXIV, 59-61.** notes On Hosea, Cap. 9, 8-12. 1001

People. This is the summa: At the time of your visitation \"you will
know\" who I have been 2c. 1)

**V. 9. they corrupt too deeply (profunde peccaverunt).**

Or: So deeply have they corrupted themselves, as if he wanted to say:
You have been so stubborn that you have resisted the godless prophet. He
was worthy of love, you hated him, he wanted to set you free, you call
him a rope 2c. - Gibeah. Note the story in the book of Judges \[Cap. 19,
22. ff.\] of the Levite\'s wife who was defiled 2c. This means \"to
corrupt it deeply\", where there is not weakness or error, but where
there is pure wickedness. The prophets cite the histories, like Isaiah
\[Cap. 13, 19.\] the Sodoms. The Gibeonites defended their sin 2c. -
\"Therefore he will remember their iniquity\" 2c. \"Now He will also
come,\" as if to say, \"Look at the example\" 2c. GOD allowed \[the
children of Benjamin to have a very great victory over Israel \[Judges
20:21, 25\]. Why did he allow it? So that the Gibeonites would become
hardened and arrogant and puffed up 2c.

**V. 10. I found Israel in the desert like grapes 2c.**

He compares the sons with the fathers, he repeats the old story, as if
to say: \"Kind does not leave kind, mother Hur daughter Hur, the goat
does not leave the garden.\" The first fruits are most loved because of
their rarity; they are called firstlings. The firstfruits, as the best
fruits, are to be offered to GOtte. Jacob says to Reuben \[Gen. 49:3\],
You are my first fruit, you are my strength 2c. - \[\"But afterward they
went\"\] ipsi, namely the fathers. \"This was my first people\" 2c. See
the history in the fourth book of Moses, cap. 25. - Confusionem
\[disgrace\] calls the Scripture one.

1\) Because the explanation of this verse is very obscure, we add here
the version of the Hallic manuscript: The prophet has become a snare in
all his ways, out of hatred in the house of his God. You, he says, have
judged that I, the prophet, am a snare because of the hatred you had
against him when you were gathered in the house of your God. - Also in
the next scripture the interpretation of this passage is clearer.

Idol; the pagans and idolaters \[give glory to their idol 2c. We are
disgraced before God by the idol, because we disgrace him 2c. \"And
turned away to the idol\" (confusionem) is how I read 2c. Glory is that
of which we boast, shame is that by which we become ashamed before God,
because we disgrace God.

**V. 11. Therefore the glory of Ephraim must fly away like a bird 2c.**

Here he begins to speak of the punishment of barrenness among men, that
they do not multiply as before. The glory of Ephraim, which comes from
bearing, from carrying, from being with child, has flown away like a
bird; so I construe it. Eorum \[in the Vulgate\] is too much according
to the way of the Hebrews. He saith not that all childbearing should
cease, but that there should not be much people in his kingdom, because,
being scattered in the captivity, they begat children. See the prophecy
of Jacob of Ephraim \[Gen. 49:22 ff. Cap. 48:19\]. The witnessing of
offspring shall become little 2c. It stood with this people well with
becoming pregnant, with carrying, with bearing. The threats and the
promises are to be understood in such a way that they happen only to one
part, so also the punishments. It is to be understood according to the
figure of the synecdoche: I will also kill the children who have already
been raised, and those who have been educated (enutritos); but not all.
He always leaves a part: a large part he kills 2c.

V. 12. **Woe to them also.**

This is a passage about which there is great dispute. It has some
appearance that the incarnation of Christ is indicated, as Lyra says,
but I do not know. It is also followed by Burgensis 2) 2c. This seems to
me violent (extortum). This is my opinion: I will kill their offspring,
they shall not prosper with their children. But also this \[shall cause
them woe\], 3) that I depart from them altogether. I will scatter them
in all the other kingdoms, I will not help them.

2\) In the manuscript and in the Erlanger: kulAknsis.

3\) Supplemented by us from the next following scripture.

1002 L. xxiv, 61-63. interpretations on the prophets. 1003

stand. I will let them live most wretchedly in the one \[remnant\], 1)
whom I have not killed, and most wretchedly. We see this in the Jews.

**V. 13. Ephraim, as I look at it.**

He explains more expansively about the destruction of the offspring.
-\[\"Pretty.\"\] Instead of in pulchritudine would be better: in their
houses or apartments. \"Tyre\" was full of people 2c., and had very
fertile women who filled the houses. A fruitful woman with her children
is called an ornament of the house. See in the 68th Psalm \[v. 13.\],
\"And the honor of the house divideth the spoil.\" Likewise \[Ps.
128:3\], \"A fruitful vine.\" -Ut vidi, \"in his time when I saw it.\" -
Instead of fundata \[st should read, \"planted.\" But this glory is
reserved for Ephraim to be led away, and for his children to be brought
forth to the death-beater.

**V. 14. Lord, give them!**

He makes the resolution with this loss of glory. - \"Dry up\" 2) is dry.
That is, it will not be in the dominion.

**V. 15. All their wickedness 2c.**

\"All their iniquity is in Galgal\" \[Gilgal\]. This place they chose
for Samuel\'s sake 2c., 1) In so, to this we have added from the
following scripture resiäuo.

2\) The kro before urentia seems too much for us.

as said above. There is all their wickedness for the sake of which he
hates them. Therefore he says: \"For the sake of their evil nature\"
2c. - \"And no longer show love\" 2c. He will love them no more for
eternity. \"It is finished with him, is gone,\" there is no more hope
that this kingdom will flourish again. John uses this figure of speech
in Lucas, Cap. 3, 9: \"The axe is already laid to the root of the
trees\" 2c.

**V. 16. No fruit.**

That is, the kingdom shall no longer come into the same state and rule
as before; tyrants shall be the princes 2c. - \"The dear fruit\"
(amantissima,) that is, the children in whom great hope will be placed
2c. If they also once get a good man, on whom they put the hope that he
will restore the kingdom, it will not happen, I will kill him 2c.

**V.17. And must go astray among the Gentiles.**

In nationibus, \"among the Gentiles,\" that is, the Assyrians, need not
have a certain residence, as it now goes 2c.

This whole ninth chapter presents the captivity itself as far as the
persons themselves are concerned; they will have less offspring 2c.

**The tenth chapter.**

The meaning is dark, not the words; \"strange prophet!\" He still seems
to talk about the captivity 2c. Although there are people who seem to
live differently, and pretend some repentance, but in a fictitious way
2c., they do not strive with right zeal to mend their ways 2c., as now
the Roman bishop. If a Thor wants to avoid the errors, he runs into the
opposite ones.

**V. 1. Israel is a devastated vine.**

Instead of frondosa \[in the Vulgate\], the Hebrew is \"a desolate
one.\" But I would like

like that frondosa, \[a leafy\] would remain, and it must not be
understood according to the opposite sense (per antiphrasin) 2c.
\"Leafy,\" that is, spread wide, and become numerous in the land, as if
to say: The vine is \"glorious\" but useless, and displeases GOtte. As
far as it is spread, so far it has a \[ungodly\] people 2c. - \"As much
(secundum multitudinem) fruit he had.\" Jeremiah \[Cap. 2, 28.\] says,
\"As many a city\" (secundum numerum civitatum). So it is said above
\[Cap. 9, 7.\], \"For thy great iniquity\'s sake\" 2c. (propter
multitudinem etc.).

[1004 **L. xxiv, 63-65.** notes on Hosea, cap. 10, 1-6.
1005]{.underline}

This they did, that by the multiplied service they \"wished to counsel
the cause.\" - \[\"Where the land was best.\"\] Ubertatem, that is,
goodness \[of the land\]. \"Where the land was good, there they made a
Pfaffengrnbe.\" Well-supplied \[idol\] pillars is Hebrew for
\"well-supplied, as now.\" \"Where the best lard pit, there \[are\^
pens, monasteries.\"

**V. 2. Now she will find her guilt (interibunt etc. ).**

Now they will have a guilt on them, they will be criminal and will be
seized in their wickedness. The word means to be guilty. - Instead of
ipse, I would read hoc \[this\], namely, that which is said \[that their
heart is divided, and now their guilt will find them\]. Ipse can also
be, \"the HErr.\" Both are good. 1) - Simulacra, that is, altars. This
is translated \[in the Vulgate\]: He will destroy their idols
(simulacra).

**V. 3. then they must say (dicent). 2)**

Better is: dicunt. \"To us is even\", as if we had no king. See the
beautiful appearance, as if it were the service of the right GOt. In the
idols they worshipped the right GOt, as in Jerusalem. In the time of the
last king \[Hosea\] this chapter is written; under the last kings (sub
quibus) prophesied \[the prophet\] Hosea.

**V. 4. They swore in vain (Loquimini verba visionis inutilis).**

In Hebrew it says \[instead of verba visionis inutilis in the Vulgate\]:
words of a vain oath, as if he wanted to say: \"Go, now you are devout
holy people\", as if he wanted to say: It is all in vain, they are words
of a vain oath, because you still continue in your vain works 2c. You do
not take hold of the faith; you rely on

1\) The Zwickau manuscript offers here only: kro ipse üoa, soll, czuod
äietuin 68t. The Weimar edition has added the Hall manuscript and thus
supplemented: ?ro ipse 6M/wo , \"eil. Huod divisnm

68t cor 6orum, utrun\^ue donum. Ip86 86Ü. dominu8. We took the last ip86
again as a cue and put utrun\^uS Uonuna last.

2\) vioent is missing in the manuscript.

your powers. - f \"And made a covenant.\"\] \[Instead of ferietis in the
Vulgate\] better: ferite. - Amaritudo is lei, \"gall.\" - Cum mendacio
3) is too much. - It is a mere metaphor by an image: \"Nothing will grow
for you from this\"; you sow a false covenant and a void oath, but
\"heartache\" will grow for you wherever you will be.

**V. 5. The inhabitants of Samaria take care of the calves**
(**vaccas**).

He lays himself out. The Lyra opinion pleases me here: For the calves to
BethAven fear the inhabitants to Samaria. This is how it should be
read. - Instead of: Et aeditui \[ejus super eum exsultaverunt in gloria
ejus so: \"Over whom his camarim \[idolatrous apostles\] used to rejoice
because of his glory.\" This is the opinion: let us pray to the God in
BethAven that only the calves may remain. The people of Samaria feared
greatly that the calf (vitulus) \[1 Kings 12:29.\] might be taken away,
because they hear that the calves also are to be taken away from (*a*)
Samaria. It is in every way quite similar to what we said of the Turks
when they made \"horse stables\" out of the churches 2c. But meanwhile
2c. Contemptuously and to disgrace he calls them cows or \"young cows\"
(vitulos). \"Ah HErrgott, also we want to be pious,\" because the king
cannot help \[v. 3.\]. \"The Camarim\" (aeditui) were clergymen, monks,
who led a more devout and austere life before others in the worship of
God 2c., \"the Ausbund\" 2c., \"observancers\" ordained to conduct the
worship of God. He does not consider them worthy of the name of a
priest, as we say: \"Barefoot, Augustinian, Pauline, Observant\".

**V. 6. Yes, the calf is brought into Assyria.**

(Siquidem et ipse etc.).

Ipse, namely the calf of Samaria. \[Instead of: munus regi ultori in the
Vulgate\] better: \"As a gift to the king at Jareb\" (Garid), that is,
even the calf will be taken away to Assyria as a gift to the king.

3\) These words are not found in our Vulgate.

4\) Weimarsche: 6xa1tar6 instead of: 6xultar6. A printing error.

[1006 L. XXIV, 65-67. interpretations on the prophets. 1007]{.underline}

to Jareb. They feared for their cows or calves that they would be taken
to Assyria 2c. - \"So Ephraim must be put to shame\" (confusio). \"With
his nobility\" \[should be hotter\] instead of: in voluntate sua. It
denotes the doctrines and the counsels by which they seduce to their
presumption. \"It must \[Israe\] go shamefully,\" 1) namely, after it
has seen that its presumption has availed it nothing.

**V. 7: For the king of Samaria is gone (transire etc.).**

That is, everything will be made desolate. For things that are brought
to ruin and destroyed, the Hebrews use dum \[XXX\] or damah \[XXX\],
which the interpreter has translated here: transire fecit. So it is
better: their king in Samaria is silent; or: he has ceased; or: he has
been made nothing, so that one does not realize that he has been here. -
Nothing is easier than the \"foam on the water\", a water bubble 2c.
\[It soon happened about Samaria\" as about a bubble on the water. 2)

**V. 8. the high places of Aden are destroyed (Et disperdentur etc.).**

Instead of: disperdentur it would be better to read: vastabuntur or:
they will be destroyed. - \"The heights\" were like with us the
\"pens\". They put the altars on some hill; these were called
\"heights\". Pens (fundationes). Instead of idoli \[n the Vulgate\]
would be better of iniquity \[\"aven\" in our Bible\], that is, of
ungodly worship, which does not comfort, but more grieves 2c. - \"Sin\"
add: \"which is\" (quid est). 3) - \"And shall say, Ye mountains\" 2c.

1\) Instead of oonkunäsutur it is probably better to read oonkunästur
with the Vulgate.

2\) The words: super kaeieru a\^uae are marked as a new keyword both in
the Erlangen edition and in the Weimar edition, but they belong to the
previous one. Since the same words are also found in the Vulgate,
ruslius cannot refer to them. Rather, the keyword vispsräsutur, with
which the 8th verse begins, is missing before it ruslius. Here, and not
only in Lxoslsa, the verse number \"8th\" should have been placed.

3\) In our Bible, \"that Israel might sin.\" In the Vulgate only:
pscaaturu Israel. From this it is clear that instead of yuiä it must be
read: \^uoä.

Christ mentions this in the gospel \[Luc. 23, 30\]. This has been a
common word among the Jews. It is a common saying applied to any future
captivity or desolation. We apply it to the future judgment, Christ to
the last Jewish captivity, Hosea to the Assyrian captivity.

**V. 9. Israel, you have sinned since the time of Gibeah.**

Here he \[Luther\] changed the text. 4) - It is another beginning with
which the prophet attacks this people to admonish them that they should
bring forth better fruit, as if he should say, \"What shall it do? it is
an old mischievousness\" 2c. Of the sin of Gibeah is said above \[Cap.
9, 9.\]. Here \[Judges 17:6\] is the first place where it is described
that \"every man did that which seemed right to him\". The city of Dan
is where the first idol is made. See about Micah \[Judges 17:1 ff\] 2c.
This sin originated in the mountain of Ephraim, after that it spread to
the tribe of Dan, as if the prophet wanted to say here: \"It is an old
sin, we have practiced it for a long time\" 2c. It is an old leprosy,
\"there it stands, cannot go away\" 2c. They stand in thy way of
sinners, Ps. 1, 1. \[Vulg.\] - \[\"So against (super) the wicked men
happened.\"\] Instead of super is propter \[to read\]. - \"It shall not
seize them of the strife at Gibeah.\" This I take (lego) to mean that it
is spoken imitatively, per mimesin, as if to say, \"It will not be true
that \[it\] shall go to us\" as to Gibeah 2c. \"Should GOD punish people
like this?\" 2c. We have made a covenant; in Isaiah \[Cap. 8, 12.\] One
shall not cry over them, says Micah \[Cap. 2, 6.\]. But the prophets
say, Calamity will come. They say, No, no! Or it can \[\"it shall not
take hold of them\"\] also be taken as a statement (indicative), as if
he wanted to say: Not like the children of Benjamin I will take hold of
them, but \"I will punish them baß 5)\", but.

4\) This will again have to be seen as a remark of the scribe. For
instead of the third person in the Vulgate (psooavit), Luther has the
second (peooasti) in his Latin translation.

5\) In our template: \"boß\".

1008 L. xxiv, 67-\"s. Notes on Hosea, Cap. 10, 10-14. 1009

V. 10. **According to my desire,**

\"Not as they will\" 2c. \"I will cool my mew on them\", I will not
punish them, as at that time 2c.-By the \"two sins\" he understands the
two calves and the two idols 2c.

**V. 11. Ephraim is a calf 2c.**

This is a dark place. \"My Ephraim is a calf\", which likes to be on the
threshing floor and to thresh. All their preoccupation is to seek their
own, \"eating and drinking\"; it (Ephraim\'s is accustomed (docta) to
seek its own. The first sin is that they deceive the people by false
teaching, the second is that they are intent on the belly 2c. After the
belly is well supplied, the rest follows, because the soul is dead and
not well nourished (saginata) by the word. The opposite (rursum) is done
by godliness; it does not let the soul suffer hunger, however the body
may be supplied 2c. In the godless life there is a very arduous work,
but still this godless people does it gladly 2c. because they are used
to it. As if to say: No calf \"can be urged\" to love threshing, only
that calf, Ephraim, does, namely, so that it may have \"to eat and
drink\" 2c.-\"About the beauty of its neck\" \[Vulg.\] or about its good
(bonum) neck. A \"strong ox\" has a hard neck, that is, \"I will pass
over his fair neck,\" \"will make him weary,\" I will bring them from
this arduousness of the ungodly being into another. - \"I will ride
Ephraim,\" as a rider on a horse or chariot, that is, I will bring
Assyrian captivity upon him 2c. - \"Judah shall plow.\" After the
kingdom of Israel is removed, there will be nothing in the land but
Judah 2c.

**V.** 12. **Therefore sow righteousness to yourselves.**

There follows an exhortation that they should counsel well with
righteousness and truth: \"Sow righteousness and reap love,\" that is,
you will obtain mercy 2c. So Paul says \[2 Cor. 9, 6. Gal. 6, 7.\] 2c.:
\"As one works (inherits), so shall he have reward,\" as if to say, Do
penance. - In ore misericordiae, 1) that is, according to mercy.

1\) In the manuscript and in the two prints: In ors via\" i. 6. juxtn
viani. We keep vias and viain

time. I take it thus: therefore sow according to the measure (pro) of
righteousness, and reap according to the measure of mercy; \"do well,
and it shall be well with you again.\" - \"Till he come.\" This he
\[Luther\] referred to Christ 2c. 2) So Paul says \[1 Thess. 5, 23.\]:
\"To the future of our Lord Jesus Christ\"; \"and wait for the appearing
of the great God\" 3) \[Tit. 2, 13.\] 2c. Likewise \[Luc. 12, 36.\]:
\"Seidel like unto men that wait for the coming of their Lord.\" This
title is not given to any prophet; no one has publicly taught
righteousness but Christ alone 2c.

**V. 13. for you plant evil 2c. 5)**

He who does a good work to receive something from God (and not freely,
for nothing) plows evil, reaps iniquity and eats the bread of lies.

**V. 14: Because you trust in your nature 2c. 6)**

See after in the prophet Jeremiah Cap. 2, 33. 35. - \"As Salman
transgressed\" 2c. \"\[Abersmal\] a difficult text.\" \[Instead of:
Sicut vastatus est Salmana a domo ejus, qui judicavit Baal in die
proelii\] I read thus: as a peaceable is disturbed in the house of
ambush at the time of war, that is, as it happens to him who dwells in
peace in his house, and suddenly the enemy bursts in and kills all,
mother and daughters 2c. But I rather believe that he touches here a
history which is not written, because Arbeel, Salman are proper names
2c. So the writing Luc. 13 touches at the beginning \[V. 1. 4.\] with
few words histories which are not written 2c. Just as it happened in
this history, he says, the Israelites shall be disturbed.

for an oversight on the part of the copyist, and have therefore assumed
missricoräias and inissrioorüiarn according to the Vulgate, which may
have been abridged in the original.

2\) Probably again a remark of the rewriter.

3\) Instead of: älsl in our template, Dsi must be read.

4\) Instead of 68tis in our template, read either \[sts or sitis.

5\) This keyword is missing in the Weimar edition, and the
interpretation of this verse is drawn without new verse number and other
distinction to v. 12.

6\) This first part of v. 14 is drawn to v. 13 in the Vulgate.

[1010 L. XXIV, 69-71. interpretations on the prophets. 1011]{.underline}

**The eleventh chapter.**

Cap. **10,** 15 **\[That the king of Israel should go down early in the
morning\] 1)**

Instead of in mane or sicut mans,.it should rather read \[in\] aurora.

This is the opinion of this chapter, that the idolatry of this people is
an ingrained evil. They are called transgressors from their mother\'s
womb 2) 2c., says Isaiah \[Cap. 48, 8\]. \"It has clung to them from
their mother\'s womb\" that they are evil, \"never let go of your
naughtiness\" 2c. So says Stephen in the book of Acts \[Cap. 7, 51.
ff\].

\"In the dawn the king of Israel is taken away,\" or: the king has
ceased in the dawn, that is, suddenly 2c. That is, I have made this
people glorious, so that all nations marvel at this kingdom. This is an
advancement of the benefits received and given in the execution from
Egypt, and a reminder; namely, from the beginning:

**V. 1. Since Israel was young,**

I have loved them very much, always done them good. My love has preceded
them 2c. Wherever they were called, there they went; me they should have
followed, but when a new teacher arose, then they followed that 2c.
\"For forty years he 3) \[God\] tolerated their ways,\" says Paul in the
Acts of the Apostles \[Cap. 13, 18.\].

**V. 4. I made them draw a human yoke (In funibus hominum \[traham eos\]
etc. ),**

That is, I will catch them with benefits 2c. by which men are caught. -
\"And walk in cords of love,\" that is, in a gentle yoke. Thus Christ
says \[Matth. 11, 30.\]: \"My yoke is gentle and

1\) In the Vulgate, this text is drawn to the first verse of the
eleventh chapter, and it is so interwoven with it in the interpretation
that we had to leave it there.

2\) Instead of korraati, which provides our template, the Vulgate will
read voeati.

3\) Instead of toleravi, read toleravit. Vulgate: snstinuit.

my burden is light.\" 4) Even this yoke did not please them, rather they
sought other gods 2c. - \"I helped them bear the yoke on their neck,\"
that is, I made light the yoke that weighed down their neck 2c., that
is, always I delivered them from the yoke they endured 2c. - Instead of
ut vesceretur is better: that I gave them food.

**V. 5: That he should not return to Egypt (Non revertetur).**

Again a threat: 5) So I have done to them 2c., therefore they shall not
return to Egypt 2c. He \[Luther\] has read of revertentur. 6) This not
returning to Egypt means that the Lord wants to subjugate this people to
the king of Assyria, and that the help of Egypt will not help them 2c.

**V. 6. Therefore the sword shall come upon their cities (Cepit). 7)**

The king of Assyria took many cities, especially the tribe of
Naphtali. - Instead of electos \[in the Vulgate\], the Hebrew says:
\"bar\". It is the way of the Hebrew language to call the princes bars,
mountains, strongholds, walls. - \"And devour, for the sake of their
nobility.\" That is, they will fall in their raths, that is, for the
sake of their raths 2c. The counsels were very pernicious (pessima) to
the counsels.

**V. 7. My people are tired of turning to me. 8)**

This is what you must understand about the spiritual return. It began
through Christ when the gospel was sent to the whole world.

4\) In the original, the predicates are mixed up.

5\) Erlanger eomininatio; Weimarsche: eovarninutio. The latter is
probably a misprint.

6\) A remark of the rewriter. - In Luther\'s Latin translation, ne
revkrtsrsutur is written.

7\) Our Vulgate offers: Ooepit.

8\) Vulgate: Lt xoxulus rn6U8 peväedit aä rsüitnm rntzum; fuZurri antern
inaxonetur eis sirnul, Huock non auksretur.

1012 **L. xxiv, 7i-73.** notes on Hosea, Cap. 11, 7-II. 1013

That is, they will be in abeyance, they will be stalled until I return
2c. - Jugum autem. This is a very dark passage. It speaks of a bodily
burden from which the people will never be freed.

**V. 8. What shall I make of you, Ephraim? 2c.**

As if to say, I will not protect and liberate you. \"What shall I make
of you?\" \"How will I make you?\" 2c. In Jeremiah \[Cap. 49, 18.\] 1)
it is said of Sodom \[and her neighbors\] that not even one hand shall
remain, so \"that nothing can be carried away,\" 2) that is, this
kingdom shall be destroyed at the same time. - \[\"But my heart is of
another mind.\"\] Conversum, that is, changed. He promises a
particularly great mercy. It grieved the Lord according to his great
mercy. \"When he hath made it too much,\" it is said: it repenteth him
2c., as if he would say, It repenteth me that the people are thus
afflicted.

**V. 9. that I will not do according to my fierce anger 2c.**

I don\'t want to exert all the violence of my anger. - \"And not a
man.\" In Hebrew, \"a man.\" As if to say: I strike and heal; a man
wants to eradicate everything completely (totum), I do not. A glorious
promise of the mercy of GOD: I want the name of mercy to remain
inviolate, and to take refuge in me. Satan wants no Christian to remain.
In the midst of death He promises mercy. If I press thee, thou shalt
take refuge in me, \"abide here!\" Nature wants to flee when it is
pressed by God. \"To me, to me!\"In tribulation. \[Compare above 3) Cap.
6, 1.: \"When it is evil to them\" 2c. - \"And I am the Holy One,\" for
He makes holy and righteous. - Note: To enter among men (ingredi)

1\) In the Weimar edition, in the margin: \"Jer. 23, 14.\", but we think
that the passage we have referred to is more appropriate.

2s In the original: \"davon kan tragen\"; transposed by us for easier
understanding.

3\) One of the two supra in the original is to be deleted. Here the
punctuation in our original is poor. Both the Erlanger and the
Weimarsche offer: \"In tridulatlons, suprn in tridulntione ete. supra 6.
6.\"

and to go out means to have one\'s being there. - \"But I will not come
into the city\" (ingrediar), that is, I will not have my being in cities
2c. He describes the nature and consecration of his future kingdom in a
few words: it will not be a fleshly kingdom, but a spiritual one, free
in spirit; it will not have cities 2c. \"The kingdom of God does not
stand in outward appearances\" \[Luc. 17, 20. f.\].

**V. 10. And he will roar like a lion.**

That is, they will follow the Lord who will make his voice sound like
the roar of a lion. Thus it is said in Amos \[Cap. 1, 2.\]: \"The Lord
will roar out of Zion\" 2c., that is, the gospel will be preached as
with the great roar of a lion and with a great voice 2c. This is the
lion of the tribe of Judah, which shall roar for his young and elect
against the enemies and ungodly 2c. - \"And when he shall roar, they
that are toward the west shall be afraid.\" That is, they will flee.
This is such a flight as happens in the camps when there is a tumult,
\"army flight.\" The word means both fright and flight. Filii maris
\[the children of the sea \-\-- \"so are toward evening\"\]; so:
fortitudo maris, that is, a very strong wind that is always at the sea.
It means the sea which the Jews call the evening \[west\], that is, the
peoples who dwell on the midland sea will not resist but will obey it.

**V. 11. \[And those in Egypt will also be terrified (avolabunt), like a
bird.\]**

Avolabunt and \"they will be terrified\" is the same verb \[in Hebrew\]
they will flee to the LORD who strikes them. Not only the Jews, but
those who are toward evening (filii maris), the Assyrians, the Egyptians
will follow the LORD at his roar 2c. \"This is of the sayings of one,\"
which Paul adduced in the first chapter of the Epistle to the Romans
\[v. 16. - \"And I will set them in their houses,\" that is, I will
gather them into the church, into the many mansions that are in my
Father\'s house. And he promises them gifts 2c. This is the summa of the
preached gospel 2c.

[1014 L. LLIV, 73-7S. Interpretations on the prophets. 1015]{.underline}

**The twelfth chapter.**

Here is a new sermon: 1)

**V. 1. In Ephraim lies are everywhere against me. 2)**

Hosea prophesied not only in one year. Here he challenges Ephraim to
zeal by comparing it to the tribe of Judah 2c. \"Fie, be ashamed of
yourselves! Look at them, they are pious people.\" It is a Hebrew idiom
\[in the Vulgate\], \"It has surrounded me in lies,\" that is, in a
lying way 2c. \[In dolo\] 3) that is, in a treacherous way. Thus in
sapientia, that is, wisely; in intellectu, that is, wisely; in
fortitudine, that is, vigorously. Circumdare means \"you go about in the
city,\" not around the walls, but everywhere, \"now and then in the
city.\" The wicked go about everywhere 2c. \"When wicked boys,\" who are
without spirit, \"come into the spiritual regiment, they go about
desolately in it.\" - Juda autem adhuc dominatur cum Deo et cum sanctis
fidelibus, that is, with holy things. That\'s how I read it. That is, it
rules by GOD, that is, Judah rules by the word of GOD and leads the
people. He looks to the times of Hezekiah; above he charged \[Cap. 5, 5.
10.\] \-\-- Cum sanctis, that is, the Levitical estate and all things
stand well in Judah. But I like what Lyra says, Cum sanctis, that is,
GOtte. The Godhead in Hebrew is often denoted by a word in the plural.
Thus in Joshua \[Cap. 24, 19. in Hebrew\] it is said: cum Deo sancti, so
in the prophets \[Jer. 10, 10. Dan. 6, 26.\] viventium 2c. Cum sanctis
fideli \[with the faithful of God, that is, whom they believed.

1\) In the Zwickau manuscript there is a gap here, which was added from
the Hall manuscript. - The first verse of the 12th chapter is in the
Vulgate and therefore also in our original the last verse of the 11th
chapter. But we have followed the counting of our Bible. - In v. 1. and
v. 2. \[Cap. 11, 12. and Cap. 12,l.j no verse numbers are set in the
Weimar.

2\) Vulg.: Oircurnckeckit ras in neZation\" DpUrailn tzt in dolo
\"Zornns Israel: \^näas andern testis aeseenckit euin Oeo et enrn
sanetis tidelis.

3\) Added by us.

**V. 2. But Ephraim feeds on the wind and runs after the east wind.**

\[Instead of aestum in the Vulgate it should read:\] 4) eurum, that is,
vulturnum, subsolanum \[\"east wind\"\]; a special name instead of a
general one. By \"wind\" he understands void pretensions. The apostle
says \[1 Cor. 9:26.\], \"sweep into the air,\" 2c., as if to say,
Ephraim undertakes many things, but it is all void. \"Grazing himself
from the wind\" is: mowing himself down with useless things (inaniter),
so that the harm falls on him who labors 2c. - \"Runs after\" is: lays
on with too much zeal. - \"And makes daily\" 2c. He lays himself out. -
\[\"They make a covenant with Assyria\" 2c.\] 5) That is, they seek to
fortify the kingdom 6) by a covenant with the Egyptians. Me they leave
and deal in deceitful things; all is void. - Mendacium is not to be
referred to worship, but to the void being. - \"Balsam\" (oleum), that
is, gifts. As the main gift he mentions wine and oil; these are the most
distinguished products of that land.

**V. 3. \[Therefore the Lord will lead the cause of Judah.**

Judah rules with the holy, faithful God (cum Deo sanctis fideli),
therefore the Lord establishes justice for Judah, \"leads Judah out in
his cause\". This he did against king Sanherib. 7) - \"And afflict Jacob
according to his nature.\" \"These he will punish with punishment.\" -
\"According to his nature\" 2c. That is, ungodly they have been, and
ungodly they will destroy.

4\) Supplemented by us according to the Hall manuscript.

5\) Inserted by us.

6\) Instead of stutuunt Maurers, which seems to us to be a scribal
error, we have assumed statuers quaerunt.

7\) This section is drawn to the preceding verse in the Weimar. The
Erlanger has the verse number here in the correct place.

[1016 XXIV, 78-77. notes on Hosea, Cap. **12, 4-7.** 1017]{.underline}

**V. 4. Yes (, they say), he has undercut his brother in the mother\'s
life and fought with God with all his strength (In utero - directus
est).**

He fought with God. Here the text sin the Vulgate\] is corrupted: Et in
fortitudine sua directus est cum angelo. 1)

**V. 5. He fought with the angel and won.**

The history is known from the first book of Moses \[Cap. 32, 24. ff.\].
In fact, Jacob fought this hard and sublime battle against God. 2) The
conscience feels the power of sin and at the same time the power of
divine wrath, which is unbearable. Jacob was then in agony (agonia)
because the Lord wanted to kill him 2c. There one sees that not Satan or
a creature fights, but God 2c. From the sword the conscience passes over
to the divine wrath, when he \"holds the spear before the mouth\".
Before Jacob was born, he was a victor, but one who had defeated a man;
since he lived and was born, he defeated GOD and the angel 2c. - \"For
he wept and besought him\" 2c., saying \[Gen. 32:26.\], \"I will not
leave thee, thou blessest me.\" Twice he found him at Bethel, as is
evident from the first book of Moses.

**V. 6. Lord is his name (Memoriale).**

Memorials is called what we call \"names\" or honor. This is the
history, but what is the opinion and context of the text? The prophets,
when preaching, are in the habit of inculcating what has happened in the
past, from which they derive consolations or punishments for the
present. As if to say, Ephraim is now all around me with his lies, and
the LORD will repay him as he deserves, whereas they should look to this
one and worship the GOD whom their fathers worshipped 2c., or whom the
father \[Jacob\] worshipped 2c. If you are in

1\) We have inserted these Latin words from the keyword here. Because we
think that the words: Lt luotudutur cmm anMlo et invaluit belong to the
following verse, and form the next keyword, but are not (according to
Luther\'s opinion) a corrupted text, to which the Weimar edition stamps
it by the superior colon.

2i Compare Luther\'s great interpretation of the first book of Moses.
St. Louis edition, vol. II, 775, tz 128 ff.

Bethel, if you want to worship God properly, do what your father did.
What has he done? \[V. 4. \"He did in the womb\" 2c. This was God\'s
choice (electio), God worked in him. It is nothing for you to boast in
your own chosen worship. If you want to be true children of Jacob
(Jacobitae), do what Jacob did 2c. You do not go under, but you will go
under. Likewise, he struggled with GOD, which is an example of a very
great faith, but you do not cling to the promises of GOD as he did. \"Of
all your strength\" \[v. 4.\]. The context of the text shows that it was
not his strength but divine strength that was given to him by GOD. With
this strength \[which is given to us by GOD\] we overcome GOD when He is
angry, since it is our strength. Our own strength 3) is as it were a
straw, God\'s anger is unbearable: how much less can anyone fight
against God? 2c. Third, in Bethel they worship GOD, that is certain. But
how? What happened before in Bethel? \"The LORD has spoken\" 2c. His
word should have been looked at, he demands faith in his word; not the
place, not the time he looks at 2c.

V. 7. **Turn therefore to your God, keep mercy and justice 2c.**

He applies and interprets the history. You will convert if you will keep
mercy and justice and hope in God, not take refuge in Egypt 2c. You are
nothing but liars if you forsake GOD and seek other worship 2c. -
\"Mercy\" is called the \"benefit\" which we receive from GOD, or which
we show to our neighbor. - \"Right\" is the custom and habit \[Ex. 21,
9.\]: \"According to the right of the daughters\" (secundum judicium);
4) in the 5th book of Moses \[Cap. 12, 1. 27, 10.\]: To keep the rights
carefully. Likewise, the office of governing and administering justice.
In the first Psalm \[v. 4.\] it is said that the wicked do not live in
any

3\) Here, either kortituäo nostra must be repeated, which we have done,
based on the relation of the Hallic manuscript, or a period must be
placed before ourn and 68t deleted with the preceding comma.

4\) Vulgate: jnxtu rnorern.

1018 L- XXIV. 77-79. interpretations on the prophets. 1019

They will not be kings and regents 2c. Similarly, the exercise of
judgment 2c. or law (juris) is also called this. That is, thou shalt be
charitable and make all thy goods common to all; likewise think evil of
no man, condemn that which is condemnable, and approve that which must
be approved 2c. \"To come right up to one\'s neighbor.\" It is not
necessary for you to bring balm to Egypt, but trust in Him 2c.

**V. 8. who the merchant 2c. (Chanaan etc. )**

Chanaan, actually means \"a merchant\" in Hebrew. In Proverbs Cap. 31,
24. it says: Chananaeo, which means \"to the merchant\". You are like a
merchant 2c. So I construe: But you are a merchant in whose hand is a
false scales, and love deceit or injustice, so that it is a likeness,
not that Ephraim was such a merchant, for he speaks of faith. Therefore,
one must understand it from the false teaching that deceives and
corrupts souls and turns them away from God.

**V. 9. I have enough (inveni idolum mihi). 1)**

The Hebrew word means soon power (dolorem), 2) soon strength and power,
as in Jacob\'s blessing to Reuben. Therefore, it is not an idol here. It
means \"full of\" grain, wine, oil 2c. When they served the true GOtte,
they were poor, lowly, but when they were in ungodly, they became rich.
This is how it is with the priests nowadays. The ungodly teachings make
both the teachers and the people rich; this is what Satan does. Although
also God sometimes withdraws the food in order to strengthen the faith
2c. But these people do not want to hope, they want to \"be sure to have
enough\".

**V. 10: How to care for the season.**

These feasts were instituted for preaching, that the people might hear
the law. He looks to the future of Christ. As we have the last day
always before our eyes as present, so the

1\) Here neither the Erlangen nor the Weimar edition has a keyword or a
verse number, but the following interpretation is drawn to the preceding
verse.

2\) This is how Luther translated the word eolorein in Gen. 49, 3.

Prophets the incarnation of Christ. That means: There will be a time
that you will come together again and hear what you used to hear at the
feast time, namely the word of God.

**V. 11. And speak to the prophets (Et locutus sum).**

I want to take everything in the future tense: I will speak 2c. - \"It
is I who give so much prophecy\" 2c. I will preach another sermon than
you have heard before; with another you will go to Assyria. I will
spread my word and teach it myself, as it is written in Joel Cap. 3, 1.
and Is. 54, 13. 3): \"They will all be taught by God.\"- He looks to the
future Christ. - \"Through the prophets.\" That is, whoever will then
hear the prophet will hear Me. The prophets will be like Me, and I will
be like you; they will speak as gods, and I will speak in them as a man.
The prophecy is about the spirit that will be given through Christ in
the future.

**V. 12. In Gilead it is idolatry 2c.**

We must get used to the heart movements and ways of speaking of the
prophets. In preaching, they refer everything to the future Christ 2c.
It does not seem well connected, one must look at their heart position.
He remains in exhorting and sannouncing\] the plague of the people 2c.
\"In Gilead.\" He seems to touch on a history which is not written. It
seems as if Gilead and Gilgal compared themselves with each other, as
the \"Observancers\" and the Franciscans do; in the great name one wants
to have the preference before the other. Gilead is a region on the other
side of the Jordan, Gilgal on the other side of the Jordan, as if to
say: \"You are as pious as in Gilead, \[they\] stink before you.\" The
interpreter translates \[in the Vulgate\] by \"idol,\" but it is
godless; \"if one is pious, they are all pious. If those in Gilead are
godless, you in Gilgal are useless people (vani), that you sacrifice
oxen without number 2c. - Etiam altaria, add erunt. Your altars, of
which you boast in Gilead, will be like the furrows of the field,
\"pounded.\"

3\) In the original: In here. 31.

1020 xxiv, 79 f. Notes on Hosea, chap. 12, 13. 15. 13, 1. 2. . 1021

**V.** 13. **Jacob had to flee.**

He gives another example. Instead of in uxore it should read: because of
a woman or for a woman. In propheta \[v. 14\] should read: through a
prophet. This also seems to be out of context. Again, he contrasts these
ungodly sons with the example of their father. Instead of servivit, san
of the second passage\] servavit is to be read, namely: he tended the
cattle, or he kept the covenant and contract \[with Laban\], as if he
wanted to say: This good father could serve the people in Syria, those
\"Junkers\" cannot serve me. That one could and did, since he was in
exile and served his god; these, who have all things in abundance and
have their residence in a fat kingdom, are degenerate children 2c. They
do not serve me, but leave me 2c., and because they do so, they provoke
me by their disobedience (amaritudinibus).

**V. 15. But now Ephraim angers him through their idols. 1)**

\"Bitterness\" is what the Hebrews call disobedience, rebelliousness.
Their intent is nothing but to provoke the Lord, that is, to provoke.
Therefore, \"their blood\" or \"calamity will come upon their heads.\"
Thus David says in the 2nd book of Samuel \[Cap. 3, 28. f.\]: Let
justice come upon you who have earned it; I am innocent. That is, they
shall bear this burden; their guilt is declared, \"The shame shall come
upon them, and mockery with it.\" Their sins brought the blood upon
them. \"The reproach,\" by which Ephraim reproaches me; it reproaches me
with its idols. Shame will come upon them.

1\) Vulg.: irnoundinm nie xrovooavit Lpüraiw in arnnritudinibus suis
sto.

**The thirteenth chapter.**

Again, a new sermon begins. These sermons have been preached in
different years and lines, as if he wanted to say: \"But a new pebble 2)
is coming. All their worship is punished by the prophets. Always new
services they set up, as we altars and churches 2c. \"But now\" 3) they
make still more. \"To silver,\" as if to say, \"Are fine saints.\" From
their silver they make a god. With disparagement and contempt he says:
Of your silver and your gold.

**V. 1. Since Ephraim taught terribly, he was exalted in Israel 2c. (Cum
loqueretur Ephraim horrorem, sublatus est ipse in Israhel). ^4^)**

2\) In the original: \"boßle\" - small farce, Schwank, Narrentheiding
(Dietz, Wörterbuch zu Luthers Schriften).

3\) Already here, in our original, the verse number \"2.\" is written,
but we think that this still belongs to the introduction up to where we
have put \"V. 1. This is also how the Hall manuscript has put it.

4\) Vulgate: LpUrniru, üorror invasit

Israel ete.

I think that horror is to be referred to the word \"teach\", as if he
wanted to say: \"Ephraim has gone on long enough with his preaching\"
2c. Similarly, in \"Baal\" \"set up a special service\" 2c. - 5) I
believe that he is talking about spiritual death. It is a brief summary
and repetition of past evils, as we say: hitherto this and that has
happened; now another is added 2c. Terrible things are said and done 2c.

**V. 2. as they can devise, namely idols (qausi etc.). 6)**

5\) Inserted by us.

6\) Vulgate: Huasi simüitudinem idolorum; in Hebrew 0\'2?H 0N2rl2.
Luther\'s later translation given above is correct. But here Luther
takes 2\'2\^ idols, which is found in our place, for identical\'with
0\'2\], sour work, which is used Ps. 127, 2. - What we have inserted is
according to the Hall manuscript.

1022 **L. XXIV, 80-83.** interpretations on the prophets. 1023

\[Instead of:\] Quasi etc. \[[[Read:]{.underline}](read:)\] who labor an
image that is like them \[namely, the idols\]. In Hebrew it is: to work
with difficulty, as Ps. 127, 2. \[Vulg. 1: \"You who eat a laborious
bread\" (panemdolorum). Instead of \"idols\" the Hebrew says: sour work,
aven, actually dolor, toil, they have turned only from idols and the
godless being. For idols bring toil 2c., arduousness, because the
ungodly have no peace. \"They that labor,\" toil with the miserable
preoccupation which is directed to idols. He means the laborious makers
of idols 2c. - \"Nor do they preach of the same,\" 1) namely, of images,
with divinations, with shtetls. - Instead of adorantes \[in the
Vulgate\] is \[in the Hebrew\] kiss, as Ps. 2, 12.; likewise Job \[Cap.
31, 27. 1 and in the \[first\] Buechner Kings \[Cap. 19, 18\^: \"All
knees that have not bowed to Baal, and all mouths that have not kissed
him.\" The kiss is a sign of worship; he \[the prophet\] signifies the
manner and custom of worship. - \"He shall sacrifice men.\" Before they
sacrificed calves, now they sacrifice men. \"This is a new thing,\" they
sacrificed children. \"Out of a defiance\" says the prophet, \"men,\"
though they are children 2c. This is horrible to hear; this is an
abomination, what is said here.

**V. 3. These will have the morning cloud 2c.**

We have had these words above \[Cap. 6, 4.\] Erunt, that is, they will
pass like \"a morning cloud\" that \"eats away\" the sun. So will your
worship be, and your security, and your boasting. He describes the
comfort they will have from this worship, but it will quickly pass and
be changed. - Sicut pulvis, that is, \"like the chaff,\" as Ps. 1:4. In
Hebrew it is the husk. A beautiful simile.- Fumario, \"smoke hole.\" The
smoke must go where the wind drives it 2c, just as the chaff from the
grain 2c.

**V. 4. But I am the Lord.**

This is what the prophet cites to lead the people to the right worship
of the one God.

1\) Here the keyword is missing in the manuscript and in the Erlanger.

to bring back: \"Here, here!\" 2c. A complete condemnation of all
worship that GOD has not instituted. There is no salvation apart from
me.

**V. 5. In the desert. 2)**

I have preserved you and can still preserve you; but \"it helps
nothing\" 2c.

**V. 6. But because they are pastured.**

\"They have abundance.\" As they have abundance of goods, so they enjoy
them. Therefore they are senseless and hopeful against me and the
prophets whom I send. And thus God is despised, who wants to be
worshipped by faith and in fear 2c. - 3) \"Having been filled and having
enough, their hearts are lifted up.\" They are subject to do everything
that comes into their heart 2c.

**V. 7. 8. I will also become like a lion against them 2c. and tear
their hardened heart.**

Thus it is said: I will cut their heart with the sword. \"A spear 4) or
point\" or sword means the Hebrew word They did as we did with the
Turks: First we prayed and made supplications. After that we sought
human help 2c., but the Turk \"always strikes in.\" - \"There,\" namely
in Assyria. - \"Their heart,\" not of all. It is a synecdoche: many will
go into captivity. The hardest enemy they will have in me 2c. They will
lie Anbegraben, they will be struck down without mercy, \"no one will
take care of them\".

**V. 9. misfortune.**

This is where the mockery begins: \"It is lost with you,\" your advice
does nothing. \"I will do it with you\", that you shall see that you are
nothing. I will show that one must flee to me.

**V. 10. Where has your king gone?**

\"Your king,\" on whom you relied. - Instead of urbibus \[in the
Vulgate\] is better \"fine-

2\) Here our template has no keyword. We have set this and the next
following keyword according to the Hall manuscript.

3\) It is only here that our template has the verse number \"6.\"

4\) \"Spieß\" put by us instead of \"heß\" in the original.

[1024 L. XXIV, 8S-8S. Notes On Hosea, Cap. 13, 10-15. 1025]{.underline}

den\" that you have. As if he wanted to say: He could not defend you
against one either. - \"Give me\", as if he wanted to say: We can not
trust GOtte, we must have a king in whom we can trust. They have always
abused kings.

**V. 11. I gave you a king (Dabo tibi).**

This is said, as it were, by proverb, and this is the opinion: I will
give thee, that is, I can give thee, that it may go ill with thee under
the king, and most grievously, when he shall be taken away from thee.

**V. 12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound together.**

Then he concludes this threat: \"It hangs together, have made a
covenant.\" They cannot be released from iniquity, they justify sin;
they cannot bear it to be taken for sin. So do our priests. \"My Ephraim
hath bound up his sin in sackcloth,\" and hideth the sin.

**V. 13: For they shall be afflicted like a woman in childbirth.**

That is, they cannot escape, \"have to serve\". Where there is no
confession \[of sin\], there is no remedy. - Ipse filius, \"is a foolish
child, foolish son\". He speaks paternally.

**V. 14. But I will deliver them from hell and save them from death.**

\"I will take away death once.\" It immediately falls on Christ. \"Death
and hell\" are frequently used among the Hebrews. Jerome has a good and
true opinion here: \"Hell\" is called everything wherever the soul may
go; \"death,\" when the soul is separated from the body. From the power
of hell I will deliver it, and from death I will set it free. - \"Death,
I will be a poison unto thee.\" Death here is the corruption that surely
kills 2c. That is, I, Christ, by my resurrection, will work from day to
day to kill you. Death, I will be your pestilence, and your disease, O
hell. In the second book of Moses \[Cap. 9, 3.\], where the Lord smote
the cattle, it says

which means pestilence. \"Death, I will be your poison; hell, I will be
your addiction.\" The kingdom of Christ is indicated. Morsus \[bite\]
they \[the Vulgate translators\] translated it. As in the 5th book of
Moses \[Cap. 21, 28.\] and in the Psalm \[91, 6.\], \"Before the
pestilence that wasteth in the noonday,\" 2c., here it is not a bite,
but \"evil, hot pestilence,\" like the fever of pestilence. \"Hell, I
will be thy devil.\" The Hebrew word also means the devil, which smites
and plagues with violent fever 2c. In a free manner Paul translated the
saying of the prophet \[1 Cor. 15, 55.\]: death shall be overcome and
devoured, hell shall be destroyed. This is the opinion. The apostles
were not too anxious (superstitiosi) in the words; this even punishes
Paul \[1 Tim. 6, 4.\]. Paul\'s translation is also not that of the
seventy interpreters. Christ has swallowed up death and hell for those
who believe. He \[the prophet\] speaks of the deed of Christ, which he
has accomplished, but how it has been distributed will follow. Few
attain this victory, and this is \"lacking\" with us, \"that we come not
near. Christ has abolished all evil. - \"The consolation,\" as if to
say, not everyone will seize this victory. Thus Paul says \[Rom. 9:2\],
\"I have great sorrow in my heart,\" 2c. - \"Hidden,\" that is, there
will be cause for sorrow.

**V. 15. for he will bear fruit between brothers. 1)**

Instead of ipse it would be better to say: hoc. 2) - \"Between
brothers.\" That is, one part will take it, one part will not. It
indicates not only the fact, but also the fruit, that one part will
believe and one part will not 2c. - \"There shall come an east wind\"
(Adducet ventum urentem). \[The Lord\] will cause a burning wind to
come, \"east wind,\" eurum, by whose blowing the red sea was dried up.
Paul alludes to this when he says that the sting of death is sin. - The
\"fountain\" he calls sin here 2c. - \"A burning wind,\" the

1\) Vulgate: Huiu ipss iutsr trutres äiviäst.

2\) This note is still drawn to v. 14 in our original.

1026 L. XXIV, 85-87. interpretations on the prophets. 1027

is the Holy Spirit, who will blow on our hearts and \"dry up the
fountain\" of death through this medicine. 1) He will blow the

1\) üuo medieina is still drawn to the following in our template.

Holy Spirit into the heart and \"dry up the fountain,\" that is, sin. -
Instead of desolabit, \[in Hebrew\] it says, \"he will dry up,\" that
is, he will transfer from the external realm to the spiritual realm.

**The fourteenth chapter.**

This is the valet, he decides. It would be best to put everything in the
indicative \[not the conjunctive as in the Vulgate\].

**V. 1. \[For they are disobedient to their God\].**

Amaricat Deum, that is, disobey their GOd. \"It shall be over.\" He
prophesies clearly of the kingdom of Christ.

V. 2 **Convert.**

This kingdom of Ephraim has fallen away, 2) therefore send yourselves to
another kingdom. It will be a new way. Not with oxen and sheep, but with
words and confession \[of sins\] \"it will come to pass.

**V. 3. Take these words with you.**

There is no other sacrifice in the New Testament than the sacrifice of
praise. We are not to take refuge in our works, but in grace and mercy.
Confessing sin and thirsting for mercy is the voice of the new people. -
\[\"And do us good.\"\] \[Accipe\] bonum,

That is, take the good that thou givest us, which thou wilt divide among
us, as if to say, Put away thine anger, and our iniquity out of thine
hand, and take the good that thou givest us. \"These are the right
farrows,\" that is, the thanksgivings and preachings of the gospel; that
is, the sacrifices of the Old Testament. Paul says \[Rom. 15, 16.\], \"I
offer,\" that is, I treat in priestly! way \"the gospel\", that

2\) So put by us; in the original: \"is dohi\" an gelegen\".

it becomes a sacrifice 2c. - \"The farrows,\" that is, the words of the
sermon. In the Epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 13, 15. it says, \"the fruit
of the lips.\" It is clear that he read \"fruit\" instead of \"farren\"
in the Hebrew. These \"farrows\" are also spoken of in the 51st Psalm at
the end \[v. 21. - \"Turn ye\" 2c. \"Depart\" from this \[false\]
confidence and expect 3) Christ.

**V. 4. We will no longer ride on steeds.**

We do not trust in our strength. Isaiah says \[Cap. 30, 15.\], \"By
being still and hoping.\" - \"Neither say any more.\" We will worship no
more with these services 2c. - \[\"Finding grace with thee.\"\] In te
means through thee. Through you the orphan will yet come to mercy, that
is, that wretched people will obtain mercy through you.

**V. 5. So I will heal their departure again.**

The promise follows. Sanabo conversionem eorum, that is, those who are
converted from this people, that is, those who are to be converted; I
will show my love so that they will see that they do not deserve it, but
in everything the opposite.

**V. 6. \[I will be like a dew to Israel.\] 4)**

Israel will be ruined, and yet I will be \"like a dew\" to \[him\], that
is, I will be preached like a sanf-.

3\) Instead of expectatis, it will probably read expeetuts.

4\) Here is no keyword in our template and the Vermahl \"6.\" is only at
the note to IMum.

[1028 L. XXIV, 87 f. Notes on Hosea, Cap. 14, 6-10. 1029]{.underline}

ter rain. This is also written in Micah \[Cap. 5, 6\]. No one knows how
this word comes down from Christ through the miraculous work of the Holy
Spirit. - Lilium, rather \"a rose.\" Ephraim will be destroyed, but I
will have mercy on it, that is, it will be a beautiful people, but with
God of red color.

V. 7. **and its branches spread out.**

\[Vulg.: \"His branches will go\", that is, they will extend far, they
will spread, namely over the whole world. In pleasure he speaks in
images. \"An olive tree.\" \"Shall praise thee\" as an oel tree, that
is, the Christian people will be a people of mercy and grace. The oil
tree \"shall be praised\" because of the oil. A gentle, lovely
people. 1) - \"Ruch.\" \"Will have good ruch\" 2c. It is the good odor
of which the Christian people are fragrant. Paul says \[2 Cor. 2, 15.\],
\"We are a good smell to God\" 2c.

V. 8. **and shall sit under his shadow again.**

Namely, of the olive tree or Lebanon. Those will be converted who are
under Lebanon; those will be cast out who are not under Lebanon, that
is, the Church. - \"On grain they shall feed and flourish like a vine.\"
He understands by this the preaching of the Gospel. - \[\"Like the vine

1\) Our template provides: peiu8 dlun6u8. Instead of

peius we have assumed populus to make any sense at all. LLoIIis is not a
keyword.

2\) It must have been the best wine, in my opinion it is the Gospel. If
you want to relate it to the Sacrament of the Altar, you can do it. It
is a beautiful promise of the kingdom and grace of Christ.

**V. 9. Ephraim, why should I continue to worship idols?**

Here the Spirit boasts that Ephraim will have no more idols. - \[\"I
will be as a hasty greening fir tree.\"\] \"Greening,\" ever greening,
implying that Christ\'s kingdom and word stand fast in persecution and
prosperity. - \"In me,\" not in you. The sermon is of mercy and the
denial of all things that are ours. \[Joh. 15, 5.:\] \"I am the vine,
you are the branches\" 2c.

**V. 10 Who is wise to understand this and prudent to know this?**

That is, few. Glorious are the promises, but who understands them? They
cling to their splendor, but who will attain this? The church is a
briar; they are deterred by the cross. - \"The ways of the Lord are
right,\" but they will be considered heretical and condemned. -
Praevaricatores, \"the transgressors.\" Here you have how the gospel
should go. The poor \"will mend their ways\", the others, who are in the
pomp, \"will be vexed\" 2c.

This is what Luther said about Hosea 2c.

2\) Inserted by us.

[1030 L. xLiv, 97 f. Interpretations about the prophets. W. vi.i4ös-r4W.
1031]{.underline}

**2. notes about the prophet Hosea. \*)**

Second redaction, after the Basel printing of 1526.

Newly translated from the Latin.

**The first chapter.**

**V. 1. This is the word of the Lord that has come to pass 2c.**

According to the Hebrew way, the prophet begins the book with a
superscription in order to indicate through it what, as we see, happens
with all words of God. For where wrath remains, there also remains
God\'s vengeance against the opponents of truth, and a very special
revelation of the word of God takes place. But Hosea begins in a
ridiculous manner and at a very inopportune time, since the affairs of
the Jews were exceedingly well off at that time. For before the Jews had
been oppressed by the Assyrians, but through Jeroboam they were restored
to their former state \[2 Kings 14:25 ff.\] Therefore they lived
securely and feared nothing. But Hosea began to preach such things as
were quite contrary to the present state, which seemed to the Jews to be
altogether incongruous. For they boasted that they had a gracious GOD,
because their numbers became great, and because of the blessedness of
the kingdom and because of GOD.

tes blessing over them. Therefore, the sermon of Hosea was considered
inconsistent, and nothing less was in view than what was to come. But
this is the way of the word of God, that it is set against the most
wise, the most learned and the most flourishing. Nevertheless, Israel
was puffed up and boasted of its privilege, namely that it was the
people of God. Therefore, they judged it to be inconsistent that Hosea
preached that they would be the very last in the sight of God.

**V. 2. And when the Lord began to speak. 2)**

The LORD uses an extraordinarily foolish beginning so that he may
further provoke the people\'s rage against Hosea. - \"Go and take a
harlot woman.\" At the er-

1\) Instead of äoum we have assumed äso. The sentence: kors ipsum äoum
ommum novisÄmnm was already offensive to the old translator, therefore
he removed it. -

2\) This keyword: Drirmipium loouemäi Domino is set by us. In the
original only here is written: Oaput I and for the second time: vsrbum
äomini as keyword.

\*This writing is copied from the same lectures of Luther on the prophet
Hosea in 1524 as the previous one. It was published in Basel in 1526
under the title: In Osoam xropkets-m anNotationss a Älartino Dutksro
WittomdorMo praolsetao. \^nno N.D.XXVI. At the end: \^puä Hiomum WolKum
Xnno Ll.D.XXVI. octav. About this book the Erlangen edition says, oxos.
opp., tom. XXIV, p. 93, that it may never have reached beyond the
vicinity of Basel and never reached Central Germany, because this
writing was not included in either the Wittenberg or the Jena Latin
editions. However, the Weimar edition reports (Vol. XIII, p. XX1) that
the book is not so rare, since it is found in Cyprian\'s library, from
which Walch published it, in the royal library in Berlin, in the city
library in Breslau, in the Rathsschulbibliothek in Zwickau, in the
possession of Knaake and the editor (Koffmane). The re-writer will be a
southern German listener, because the words spoken by Luther in German
are \"transferred as far as possible into upper German language form and
orthography\". These notes are far more scanty than those of the
previous redaction, which may be due in part to \"the fact that the
scribe could not follow the lecture so quickly,\" and in part to the
fact that some things were probably omitted during the revision of the
text before printing (Weim. Ausg., I. e. p. XXID. The fourteenth chapter
is missing entirely, and only four notes on the thirteenth chapter are
included. We would like to attribute the non-inclusion in the old
editions to this deficiency. Walch first published this work in a German
translation. In Latin, it is first found in the Erlangen edition, opp.
XXIV, p. 97, then in the Weimar edition, vol. XIII, p. 2 in the form of
notes to the preceding text. We have followed the Weimar edition in the
translation, which has improved many of the errors of the Erlanger. We
have endeavored to improve some errors that still exist.

1032 **98-100.** notes on Hosea (2.), Cap. 1, 2-6. **W. VI, 1498-IS01.**
1033

Many have struggled to clarify this text. Jerome was still lacking in a
tolerable way, considering the antics of the school theologians who say
that it is commanded that we should fornicate. But since this is
unworthy and unbearable, we let it go. Jerome says that the prophet took
a whore, but that she lived chastely afterwards. It seems to me
\[\"whore woman\", XXXXX XXX\] here.

to be a proper name of the woman, as afterwards \[v. 9. 6.\] \"Not my
people\" \[LoAmmi\], \"Not mercy\" \[LoRyhamo/ 2c., that she should
represent the shame of the people, that that fornicating woman and the
children begotten of fornication should indicate the idolatry in this
fornicating people. If someone understands it in this way, he can easily
get out of the difficulties that the school theologians have made. -
\"For the land runneth after fornication from the Lord.\" This is the
cause of the foregoing: as a lewd person fornicates away from his
husband in a carnal way, so the soul that is shepherded by God\'s Word
alone, but turns away from Him to human teachings, is said to fornicate.

**V. 4. Call him Jezreel.**

This son represents all Israelites as one person, because he says that
he will pay the blood debt of Jezreel. So that no one has an obstacle
when reading the prophets, he must know that the kingdom of Israel was
divided into two parts, into the kingdom of Judah, which had two tribes
and was small in number of people, and the kingdom of Israel, which
consisted of ten tribes. - \"For it is yet for a little.\" This is a
hard prophecy and unbelievable to the people. Therefore they despised
the prophet, and cared not for him, as a liar and a heretic. In this you
see the blindness of human nature. The people thought they were growing
and doing well. But here he preached the future wrath, because he sees
in the spirit the coming devastation. Thus, the wicked judge God by His
benefits, and if they think that He is most favorable, they will find
Him to be a terrible judge. - \"The Blood Debt at Jezreel.\" It is
doubtful whether this is in active or in

is to be taken in a suffering way. Whichever of the two one may assume,
nothing comes to this history, 1) what one reads about Jehu \[2 Kings
10:25\], namely that he shed blood. It also cannot be referred to the
blood of Naboth. Therefore one must guess here and believe the prophet
that the house of 2) Jehu shed the blood of many, and it is probable
that he also killed many prophets, 3) who could not help crying out
against ungodliness and false worship, as it took place in this twofold
service of the calves. If this remained unharmed \[so the people
thought\], 4) so also the kingdom remained unharmed, again, if this had
been taken away, so also the kingdom must fall. Therefore, they resisted
the prophets in every way to keep the kingdom unharmed. Namely so
extraordinarily God-fearing (religiosi) they were.

**V. 5. I will break the bow of Israel.**

By \"bow\" he means all the weapons with which the Jews fought against
the kings of the Assyrians. But God broke that bow, in which they
trusted more than in Him. Therefore, we see that the people who were
puffed up by such a glorious privilege were abandoned. But that kingdom
had to be diminished so that the kingdom of Judah would become stronger,
which has been afflicted many times, but not destroyed from the ground
up. For God says \[Ps. 89, 34\]: I will not turn away my mercy from my
people forever. Thus it is said in the first book of Moses \[Cap. 49,
10.\], \"The scepter of Judah shall not be taken away.\"

V. 6. **LoRyhamo** (Absque misericordia).

As if to say: Call them non-mercy. Because \"Lo\" means \"not\", and
\"Ryhama\" mercy, as if he wanted to say

1\) If one wanted to bring this relation in line with the previous one,
then instead of sueeurrit it would have to be read: sueeurrunt, and
other changes of the text would have to be made.

2\) Instead of äomiruiM. will read äollium.

3\) Here our pattern has a punctum. - Instead of potsst, which follows
immediately, we have assumed potsraut. The old translator despaired of a
solution and omitted the following in this note.

4\) Added by us after the first redaction.

1034 xxiv. loo-iüs. Interpretations- about the prophets. W. vi.
ibm-isoi. 1035

say: she shall not be in mercy. For the daughter was without mercy and
represented the people on whom God would no longer have mercy.
Previously, we read that God would destroy the kingdom of Israel,
therefore He would not only overthrow it, but also never restore it,
which is exceedingly terrifying.

**V. 10. And shall be done in that place.**

As if to say, I will raise up another people, but not in Jerusalem nor
in Judea, but in the place where there is not a people, that is, among
the Gentiles.

**V.11. For the children of Judah and the children of Israel will come
in multitudes.**

Israel must never physically become one with Judah again, but
spiritually with

Judah will become one\... \"And will hold one another to one head,\"
that is, to Christ. Therefore, the text must be understood in this way:
one passage \[v. 6\] of bodily unity, the other \[v. 11\] of spiritual
unity. Otherwise both would be false and contradictory to each other. -
\"For the day of Jezreel shall be a great day.\" \"The great day\" is
that which the risen Sun of righteousness, Christ, illuminates. -
\"Jezreel.\" Jezreel is a city and an exceedingly powerful residence of
the Kingdom. So he wants that people to dwell no longer in the fleshly
Jezreel, but in the heavenly one. This is certainly a dark passage, and
added to make the prophecy dark. For this is God\'s counsel, that we
should understand His counsel in the last time.

**The second chapter.**

If this whole chapter is not taken as being said by the prophet to the
apostles that they should proclaim the mercy of God to the Jews as well
as to the Gentiles, then I do not see what the prophet wants. Therefore,
the prophet puts into the mouths of the apostles that by which he wants
to call the Jews to faith. The opinion is: You who believe, take this
office upon you to punish your sister, the synagogue.

**V. 2. Tells them to put away their adultery from their breasts.**

\"The breasts\" are the teachers who feed the people with their
teaching. For as a mother suckles a child from her breasts, so a teacher
nourishes the people through his teaching. If this is good, they
increase by it, but if it is bad, they perish. This whole text is not to
be understood in such a way that it deals with what follows the future
of Christ, but with things already present and also with things to come.

**V. 5. I will run after my wooers.**

Making a false god and committing idolatry is not making another god,

which is impossible, and this is not the opinion of the one who does it,
since he thinks that by doing so he will reconcile the true God. But it
is a real idolatry, since we misuse the name of God for the most ungodly
lies, for works, for ceremonies and our dreams, because God does not
have this intention, nor does he remember it. So my memory invents that
as God, which is not God, and such a one, for which he does not want to
be taken. I will take an example of this: King Ahab set up Baal and
burned incense to him, not under the name that that idol was the devil
and that worship was devilish, but he thought like this: \"Behold, I set
up the image pillar to honor the true God who brought us out of Egypt.
Sacrifice to this god and burn incense at this image pillar. Behold,
this worship is called idolatry, and contrary to the first commandment,
and devilish, because it is different from that which God commanded and
commanded to be kept. It is the same with us with the images, since we
say that under this image the true God is worshipped and no other. This
is not a lie; it is a service of Baal,

[1036 **L. XXIV, 102-104.** notes On Hosea (2.), cap. 2, 5-18. **W. VI,
1S04-I507.** 1037]{.underline}

God does not want it that way. For idolatry is first of all internal,
since it invents a false idea of God, imagines Him differently,
conceives of a different worship than He wants. That is why the whole of
Scripture insists that the true God be rightly recognized, and it is all
due to the first commandment. The root of idolatry is the false thought
with which one forms false ideas about God, as is the case with us now,
where so many ways of serving God have been invented.

**V. 13. So I will visit upon them the days of Baalim.**

Why they called the idol Baal is not sufficiently known, but I suppose
that they called him masculum, \"the men\", because his work seemed to
be perfect. So we call \"male (masculum), which is the best, as masculum
oleum, \"ore oil\" (Oertzöl). But it Baal denotes a husband who has a
wife under him. And they gave him this name for this reason, because the
service of this idol should be the most perfect and unlimited, and far
surpass that which Moses had given. Therefore they called him the
arch-god *(άρχί&εον),* because they worshipped him with the most perfect
service.-\"With forehead braces\" (Inauris). 1) Inauris \[earrings)
means the word of faith, which should be constantly in our ears.

**V. 15 The valley of Achor.**

It is not doubtful to me that this expression was said by the Jews as a
proverbial image of those who were hard-pressed and lived most
miserably. If we had the right Hebrew grammar, in which the manner of
speech of this language, the figures, the flowery speeches (schemata),
the proverbs were taught, then the Bible, which is otherwise very
difficult, would undoubtedly become very easy for us.

**V. 16. Then 2c.**

A glorious text and entirely spoken of the new testament and the
preaching of the gospel. - \"And me no more my

1\) Erlanger (here and immediately following): In aurls instead of
inauris.

Baal.\" That is, my wife will no longer call me my Baal, that is, I will
destroy that reliance on works, and that worship, which they consider
perfect, 2) I will also destroy when I give the preaching of the Gospel.
Here you have a clear text that they have attributed the service of this
idol to the true God, and thought that this is served by it. Nor must
you think that Ahab and Jezebel were such foolish and foolish princes
that they would have sacrificed to the devils. They were very wise and
understanding princes, so that you can hardly know any other king who
ruled more blessedly and beneficially. They were not like our princes,
who are real lummoxes and incomprehensible, so that one cannot even know
whether they are human beings. Ahab was driven by excessive cleverness
(I am speaking of the carnal) to invent and establish this new service,
through which, he believed, his god, who had led them out of Egypt,
would be given the honor due to him. Accordingly, he imitated the Law of
Moses in its entirety, and believed that through this service God was
more properly honored than through the Law itself. Therefore, the
highest honors followed it; this worship increased, great wealth was
spent on it, and nothing was omitted that could promote it. But what did
David, the very powerful king, not suffer! He was persecuted by King
Saul, then driven out by his son Absalom, severely punished by God. For
the godless service is followed by the highest honor, the godly by the
cross and disgrace.

**V. 18. And I will make them a covenant.**

Above he said how a Christian is led into solitude, that is, from the
physical realm into the spiritual. But a covenant is made with him to
keep it, that is, not to harm but only to benefit, both the birds of the
air and the worms of the earth, both death and sin. For by faith he has
all things. For Paul says \[Rom. 8:31:\]

2\) Instead of xuMbanb we have assumed xutant.

10Z8 D. xxiv. 104-106. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. ism-isos.
1039

\"If GOD is for us, who may be against us?\" - \"And will let them dwell
safely.\" When the prophets describe the kingdom of Christ, they make it
a calm, quiet and peaceful kingdom. Therefore, the evangelists write
that the highest peace was in the world when Christ was born, indicating
that to a Christian man, who belongs to Christ\'s kingdom, everything is
calm and quiet and peaceful, and he does not fear death, sin and hell,
knowing that nothing can harm him, but only benefit him.

**V. 19. I will betroth myself to you.**

It is not only said: I make a covenant, 1) but: \"I will betroth myself
to you\", as if he wanted to say: I will be the bridegroom, you will be
the bride. But he could have expressed God\'s love for us by a higher
simile. What love is more fierce, holy and lasting than that between a
bridegroom and a bride? Therefore, if there were no other promise than
this, we would be sufficiently certain that God has the most gracious
disposition toward us. - \"In righteousness and judgment.\"
\"Righteousness\" is whereby we are made righteous by GOD, \"judgment\"
whereby we rule over the flesh. For as soon as we are justified, we are
immediately lords, and rule both over the flesh and over death. And so
far does our righteousness extend as his kingdom extends, and will then
cease when his kingdom shall cease. In short, a Christian rules
everywhere, he is a prince over all, and there will be no end to this
kingdom. - \"In grace and mercy.\" Chesed, Rachamim. The Hebrew language
is richer in words expressing grace and mercy than the Greek and Latin.
But it is actually \"grace\" that Paul calls, the Latin beneficium, the
German \"Gottesgüte\". There are several such passages, both in the
Psalms and in other prophets, including Paul. However perfect we may be,
we do fall at times. But even if this sin would be so great, it will be
forgiven to the bride, and this means: \"in mercy\" \[Ps. 103, 4.\].

1\) Erlanger: xueis eor instead of: xueiseor.

**V. 20. Yes, in faith I will betroth myself to you.**

This Hebrew expression \[XXXXX\] can also be interpreted in this way: in
the currency, 2) and someone could make many quibbles here that the
faith is not meant. But what was the point of that? There is little in
it, however the expression is translated, if only the sense remains
intact. Paul sometimes translates the expressions in a different way in
order to shut the mouths of the wranglers who argue about one
expression. The opinion is: everything that is not faith is not the
bride; everything that is apart from faith is an adulteress. But where
faith will be, there everything will be perfect. We will increase from
day to day, from one virtue to another.

**V. 21. At the same time.**

Paul to the Corinthians \[2 Cor. 6, 2.\] says: \"I have heard thee in
the acceptable time.\" Ps. 32:6: \"For this shall all the saints beseech
thee in due season.\" In the New Testament, Christians are given this
honor, that they may be sure that God will hear them. For the spirit
represents us \[Rom. 8, 26\]. There stands the word of GOD \[Luc. 11,
9.\]: \"Ask, \"and it will be given to you.\" The opinion of this text
is this: I will see to it that my Christians have all things
superfluous, and that they lack nothing both in spiritual and bodily
goods; they shall have oil, wine, grain. But in the meantime let them be
mindful of the valley of Achor, when it seems to us that we are
afflicted with want, hunger, and dishonor. For a Christian is fed even
in the midst of famine. Thousands of people would rather perish than one
Christian.

**V. 22. And the same shall hear Jezreel. 3)**

Respondebunt would be better than exaudient. Why he called the
Christians Jezreel, is not

2\) Instead of virtute in the original we have assumed vsrituts
according to the previous relation.

3\) In our original exuuüiet, for which (according to the Vulgate)
6xuu6i6ut is to be read. Accordingly, rsspon\^sbunt and exaudisnt must
be read immediately afterwards instead of rssxonäsdit and exarMiet, as
the previous redaction testifies.

[1040 **xxiv, 106-108.** notes on Hosea (2.), Cap. 3, 1-4. **W. vi,
isos-1512.** 1041]{.underline}

known enough. I think the prophet adds this to make the prophecy dark.
But I understand it this way: As Jezreel was a city of the kingdom and
the head in Israel, so all churches and assemblies of the Christians are
called Jezreel, because there Christ, the head, and the seat of the
kingdom is. The prophet is obviously speaking here of the spiritual
kingdom, as is clear from the text. So it means Isa

reel according to the secret interpretation the church, in which \"the
seed\" \[v. 23.\] is the word of God, which Christ sows 2c. Above \[Cap.
1, 4. 5.\] it is to be understood of the fleshly Jezreel and the fleshly
kingdom. Therefore the prophets, and so also all Scripture, must be
interpreted as the words read, and nothing must be drawn from secret
interpretation unless supreme necessity requires it.

**The third chapter.**

It is a question of which captivity the prophet is talking about here.
Some have understood it of the Babylonian captivity, others of the
Roman. If I might venture, I would maintain that he is speaking of the
former captivity of which he has hitherto spoken, namely, the Assyrian,
for we have no other captivity of the children of Israel than this. But
I leave to each his opinion. But the sum of this chapter is that he
describes the captivity of the children of Israel, which they suffered
from the Assyrians, and that after that they would return to Christ.

**V. 1. and court a jug of wine (Et diligunt vinacea).**

Here the Hebrew language leaves us. Therefore, we must see with foreign
eyes, because this word is interpreted in many ways. But I read it like
this: vinacea uvarum \[grape marc\], so that it is a proverbial way of
speaking, as if he wanted to say: Although I, the Lord, love this people
so much, and although I forgive them their misdeeds so often, they turn
away from me and go after strange gods. Let them now go and fill
themselves with the marc, since they do not want the must, that is, let
them treat my law in such a way that they turn the spiritual teachings
into carnal ones, that is, into human teachings, which are in truth
marc. That is, they seem to be something good, but when you taste them,
they are not good.

you get nothing but husks 1) and deaf oats. So such teachings, with
which those people deal, seem to be good and divine; they accept them
because they have not respected the divine teachings. And we say: Sus
amaracum. 2)

**V. 2. And I became one with her.**

A homer of barley was a kind of grain measure, as with us \"a bushel\".
So in Hebrew ten homers, which is \"a malt,\" just as cad (χάδος) is a
wine measure, \"a measure.\" But the prophet here seems to indicate that
the good given to the harlot has certain limits and a prescribed
measure. The other, which concerns David, has no number, that is, it
will have no end in eternity.

**V. 4. Without ephod and without sanctuary (Sine Ephod et sine
Theraphim).**

I do not believe that the prophet is talking about the \"ephod\" which
was appointed by God in Jerusalem. For as Jerome interprets it, it means
images that were on top of the garment. But as he spoke above of the
perverse service, so he speaks here of the perverse ornaments.
\"Theraphim\" does not otherwise have a good meaning in Scripture,

1\) Instead of sili\^inern (fine wheat flour) we adopted ciliquarn after
the previous redaction.

2\) The Weimar edition notes: \"S. Oellius praskat. 19.\"

1042 L.xxiv,io8f. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, isi2-isis.
1043

therefore it is not necessary to explain it here in a good sense. But it
means images and idols, which were not allowed in the holy city, but in
the Amorite Bethel, where the calf service was. So it means: As I make a
covenant with that adulteress that she shall not be with another man, so
shall you be widows and leave your altars and your idolatry.

**V. 5. After this the children of Israel will be converted.**

These words must be understood of the kingdom of the spirit, and by
David is to be understood Christ, so that the immeasurable

and rich mercy of God must be understood by this word \"grace\" (bonum).
The opinion is: the Israelites who are freed from this captivity will
recognize the true good from the preaching of the apostles, which they
will accept and honor and also fear. There is nothing but good and an
abundance of good, so that they will no longer be troubled by the law
and the servitude of the law, but will know Christ in pure faith.

So far the first part of the prophecy is treated, by which the prophet
indicates the omens of future things. In the following he will deal with
present things, namely with their vices.

**The fourth chapter.**

In this chapter the prophet begins to punish the great vices, namely the
fruits of unbelief, at the same time also unbelief itself.

**V. 1. Hear, O children of Israel, the word of the LORD.**

The one who preaches must be sure that he speaks the word of the Lord,
so that he can always say: This is what the Lord says. - \"For there is
no faithfulness\" (veritas). There are two Hebrew expressions which mean
truth, emeth and aemuna. Paul translates aemuna by \"faith,\" since he
says \[Gal. 3, \"The righteous shall live by his faith.\" But it
actually means truth in an active way, as GOD is true in His truth. The
faith (fides) of Christ, the faith that is directed toward Christ.
Emeth, however, means the truth in a suffering way, as when God pours it
into our hearts and makes us true, as, the truth of God, the faith of
God, the mercy of God is not that which is in God, but that which He
pours into our hearts and communicates it to us in this way. \"The
righteous shall live by his faith,\" that is, in the power by which he
adheres to divine truth. - \"There is no

Word of God\" (notitia). The knowledge of God is that we know that we
are nothing, that we live, work and are active only through the mercy of
God, in short, when we recognize God and God\'s goods in us through
faith.

**V. 2. One blood debt comes after another.**

The guilt of the blood and the guilt of the vengeance that should have
been taken. Therefore, the voice of blood is the cry because of the
blood that has not been lamented, not avenged. Hence the opinion: there
is no one who punishes the guilty; they all murder and rob, no one
resists.

**V. 5. I will execute your mother (Tacere faciam).**

In Hebrew it means silent (silere) and actually means \"to be still\".
Therefore also Virgil says: \"The silent shadows\", because they are
nothing. But here it actually means \"to be nothing,\" so that the
opinion is: Today I will silence your mother, the synagogue, and make
her so completely nothing that nothing will be heard from her, namely
her worship.

1044 L- xxiv, 109-ni. Notes on Hosea (2.), cap. 4, 6-13. W. vi,
isis-isn. 1045

**V. 6. Therefore I will also reject you, that you shall not be my
priest.**

That is, because you have forsaken me, your God, the living source, and
have turned to your works, I will leave you to your thoughts, and you
may have for yourself a priesthood of your own, which shall be yours and
not mine, and I will take my knowledge away from the priest. For he is a
priest who has the right knowledge of God and the sound understanding of
the Scriptures. Those who have this have God and are blessed; those who
do not have it have the devil and their own teachings.

V. 7. **I will put their honor to shame.**

That is, they set up for themselves a brilliant and splendid worship,
many sects, many works in which they trusted; all this I will put to
shame and nothing.

**V. 8. They devour 1) the sin offerings of my people.**

They feed themselves gloriously on the sins of the people, that is, they
have established a worship that is nothing but sin, from which they live
splendidly; they have enough through this perverse worship. The people
turn their attention to feeding those who maintain and preserve this
worship. And they \[the priests\] make their souls eager (sublevant
animas eorum), that is, they give them such teachings by which they
believe to live godly and holy and even to have God Himself already
gracious and favorable, but they shut their mouths (suspendunt eos), 2)
that is, they deceive, cheat and defraud them.

**V. 10. that they will eat, 3) and not be satisfied.**

I will bring this people and its priest into such hunger and lack of all
things that they shall eat and drink, but never be satisfied. I will
lessen this fornication, that is, idolatry, but I will

1\) Instead of in the original and in the editions

is 60lN64nnt to read what Luther has in his Latin Uebersetzung; Vulgate:
Lonisäsut.

2\) For this translation, see the previous scripture.

3\) Instead of luandiEt in the original, rnanänosut will be read.

not make him stop completely. In the meantime, there will always be the
desire that they would like to perform it, but they are not able to, so
that the opinion is: \"It does not want to come as much as they want.
This is what is happening nowadays: the mass priests 4) and the monks
would like to continue to deceive the people with their fictitious
hypocrisy, so that they would sell them their lead and their prayers,
but they cannot; God has diminished to some extent what they desire, but
has not made it stop altogether.

**V. 11. Fornication, wine and must make mad.**

The Prophet appropriately turns a proverbial saying against the priests
and idolaters, as if to say: \"What else can you swine do but, despising
knowledge, pursue your lusts, since this is your one desire, that you
may always be swine and fornicators? We see that nowadays there is
nothing more unlearned and unskilful than our monks and priests, who are
neither fit to govern a community nor even a household, and whose one
ambition is to be excellent drunkards, gluttons and fornicators.

**V. 12. My people ask their wood.**

That is, they go to ask their wood for advice and receive revelations
(oracula) from their stick. Disdainfully, the prophet here calls their
god a wood that grew in the woods or in their home. He speaks of the
wood from which a staff could be made as soon as a god. So it happens
also nowadays that we get answers from our own presumption: As long as
you have worn this garment, as long as you have prayed, so you are holy.

**V. 13. Up on the mountains.**

That is, they run to the idols that are set up on the mountains and on
the hills; there they sacrifice, there they worship God. So the prophet
is punishing their presumption and the works they have chosen. -
\[\"Under the Beeches\"\^The Interpreters Have

4\) Instead of saeriüd in the original, read saeriüeuli.

1046 D- mv- 1I1-H3. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1517-1520.
1047

the custom, if they do not know what kind of tree it is, to call it
terebinthus. I believe that it is either the oak or the beech. - \"For
they have fine shades.\" To their ungodly being they chose especially
such oerter, where would be both pleasantness and delight. The ungodly
doctrine wants to be so sure of its pleasure that it chooses not a bad
but an exquisite pleasure, and that in the most comfortable places.

**V. 15. Do not go to Gilgal 2c.**

That is, stay in Jerusalem, do not seek other places for your worship.
Jerome calls BssthEl instead of BethAven, because they are neighboring
cities; and besides, nothing special happened in it, that for its sake a
separate service should have been established. For the Jews were in the
habit of setting up their own services in places where something special
had happened, or where prophets or kings or a glorious victory had taken
place. I think that the prophet in a great displeasure called it
BethAven, which means a house of ungodliness, and not BethEl, which
means a house of God 2).

1\) Instead of st, we have assumed sa.

2\) In the original: §auäii instead of: Oei.

V. 16. **So** 3) **the Lord will also feed them.**

Jerome interprets this of the Assyrian 4) captivity. I understand it
this way because \"to feed a lamb\" does not have an evil meaning in
Scripture, as if to say: Let Israel go their perverse and ungodly ways;
the LORD will feed you like a flock of lambs. You will be a lovely
flock, which the Lord will feed in a spacious and lovely place, if you
do not turn away from Israel.

V. 19. **The wind with its wings will drive them bound.**

Everything is said of Israel and Judah. The wind will therefore drive
Israel bound with its wings. \"The wind has seized him\" 2c., that is,
they will be carried away by the wind like a bird that the wind carries
away with force. For they are carried away by the wind, the impetuous
urge of fornication, to all shameful deeds. Therefore, away with them,
they may perish as they wish, if only they do not drag Judah with them.

3\) In the original: Non instead of: Nune.

4\) Due to the previous redaction we have put riaea instead of: L\^riaea
in the original.

**The fifth chapter.**

The prophet did not write this prophecy at one time, nor did he preach
it in one year, but as he was moved by the spirit, so he prophesied. It
seems that Isaiah lived at the same time. Considering the circumstances
of the kingdoms and the events, the prophets are more easily understood.
In this chapter he goes to something special; he does not speak in
general. It is a sublime way of speaking, because it is a powerful
exhortation. And this is the opinion, which cannot be taken from the
holy scriptures, also not from the chronicles, but only from this
chapter: The king of Assyria was

The rebellion was already on their necks and devastated their land.
Therefore, the princes and the priests held an assembly in which they
talked about the reformation of the land and about a new sacrifice with
which they would reconcile God. Therefore the prophet cries out: \"You
fools, what do you think of a new service and a new sacrifice, since you
have abandoned the right service of God? There is no justice, no
judgment in the land, everywhere the poor are oppressed, the rich mock
the poor, and you think that you want to reconcile God by increasing
your godlessness? Nothing less than that.

1048 **L. XXIV, 113-115.** notes On Hosea (2.), Cap. 5, 1-10. **w. VI,
1S20-IS23.** 1049

**V. 1. You who became a rope at Mizpah.**

I wonder that this excellent passage has been corrupted both by the
seventy interpreters and by Jerome, who put a generic name \[namely
Speculation\] instead of a proper name \[\"Mizpah\"\]. Perhaps it was
done by God\'s judgment. The opinion is this: By the sacrifices you made
at Mizpah and Thabor, you accomplished nothing other than to offend GOD
more severely than He had been offended before. Not everywhere was a
famous place; where something special had happened, they ran together
and set up a new worship service. Mizpah was a famous city, where the
prophet Samuel anointed the first king, where several kings and prophets
had also been.

**V. 3. Israel is 4) unclean.**

You set up a new worship by which you seek victory against the king of
Assyria, but what have you done but cause trouble among the people, who
by this hypocrisy of yours and this godless worship have led many into
error and caused them to run after strange gods. That is, under the most
beautiful pretense you hide your sacrifices in the depths, so that no
one can see how godless and evil they are. You are always looking for a
pretext for an evasion, so that you can deceive us prophets, even God
Himself. But you don\'t do anything, you can\'t hide it, because we know
everything.

**V. 5. Judah shall also fall with them.**

This is spoken according to the synecdoche, not that the people of Judah
should now perish, but that several cities \"together with them\" should
be taken by the king of Assyria when he desolates Israel.

**V. 7. They despise the Lord. 3)**

As if to say, It was not enough that they themselves departed from me
and set up an ungodly service, but they forced

1\) In the original: in instead of: est.

2\) In the original: Israsl.

3\) In the original: domino instead of: douainuna.

even their children and boys to become idolaters. Here you see how great
a sin it is if you do not raise the children in the law of the Lord and
in His fear.

V. 8. **Blow the trumpets at Gibeah.**

This passage is so obscure that I do not know what the prophet wants to
be understood. But it seems that the prophet wants to speak here of the
general destruction of the whole people, both of Israel and Judah. For
from the position of the country it is seen that the tribe of Benjamin
lies in the middle between Judah and Israel, and has famous cities,
Gibeah and Ramah, so that the opinion is: \"Prepare yourselves for
battle, you may well do so, for you will be afflicted and distressed;
you will fight with each other at Gibeah, at Ramah, and after that you
will start a new kingdom.\" 4) By these words, \"Blow the trumpets,\" he
exhorts them to battle, the feiud is already at the door; in sum, he
indicates that the destruction and ruin of the land is already present,
and the law, the works, the ceremonies must be done away with, and faith
must be established.

**V. 9. Before this I have faithfully warned the tribes of Israel (In
tribubus Israel ostendam^5^ ) fidem ==** among the tribes of Israel I
will make known my reliability).

It does not indicate faith in GOD, but certainty, so that the meaning
is: \"I will prove to them that my word is true.\" I will show them that
I am true and that my prophets have proclaimed the truth to them, and
through experience they shall know its truth. And so he puts an end to
the whole nation with one word. It will be devastated.

**V. 10. The princes of Judah are like those 2c.**

These two peoples were united by an indelible hatred,

4\) In the original, this passage reads thus: \"Rüstend üch an stryt ir
dörfft es wol, dan üch würt Jomer und dist angen, würt üch mit einander
schlachen, zu Gaba, zu Rama und würt darnach ein nuw rich anfahen.\"

5\) This reading is found in the Erlangen edition, but in the Weimar
edition as well as in the Vulgate: ostsndi. The former reading seems to
us to be the correct one, both according to the interpretation that
follows immediately and according to the previous redaction. Also the
old translator reads: oktendaur.

[1050 v. xxiv. H5-H7. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. iDW-isss.
1051]{.underline}

because of the boundaries of the fields. For Judah complained that
Israel would take possession of its fields, and Israel complained that
Judah would do so. Therefore the prophet says: \"Behold, Judah, you who
have always wanted to subjugate Israel, you have been granted your wish.
For Israel will be taken captive to Assyria; you will rejoice and be
safe, but I will come between you and pour out my wrath on you like
water.

V. 11. **For he gave himself at (man\'s) commandment (Quoniam coepit
abire post sordes).**

Others read: post praecepta, but Jerome reads sordes, with which I want
to remain. 1) He therefore indicates that the Israelite people suffer
great injustice at the hands of the Assyrians and

1\) The old translation has here the wrong keyword: \"Ephraim suffers
violence\", and has omitted the preceding, because it was not to be
brought in line with it, has also made changes in the following.

has neither the exercise of judgment nor of righteousness, because it
has begun to follow filth, that is, it has fallen away to the
abomination and unbelief of the Gentiles. It has forsaken its God and
His commandments and law, therefore it has nothing but filth.

V.13. **And Ephraim went to Assyria, and sent to the king to Jareb.**

Here one must guess, because no scripture exists, which gives testimony
of it. The opinion is: The people of Israel and Judah sent gifts and
offerings to the king \[of\] Jareb, who lived in Assyria, to make the
king pleased with them, also so that he would allow them to go back to
their land. But no king will do this, not even he in whose land you are,
for you are my captives; I have sent you into captivity, and no other
will set you free.

**The sixth chapter.**

This is the transition to the kingdom of Christ, because these words
\[\"They will have to seek me early\"\], 2) which are so glorious and
magnificent, could not be understood of any other kingdom than the
kingdom of Christ. The opinion is: This people will come to me after its
captivity, since it was well afflicted and worried, and I will give it
rest.

**V. 2. He makes us alive after two days.**

We will indeed die and be afflicted with misery, but he will raise us
again after two days, that is, in a short time. Or more correctly, this
passage is viewed according to that in which Paul boasts \[1 Cor.
15:4.\] that Christ will rise again on the third day, so that this is
the opinion: that Christ by his resurrection would make us all alive.
Therefore, he understands not only the resurrection itself, but also its
power and effectiveness.

2\) Inserted by us. Immediately before we have instead of: Uc\>6 vsrdo
angenomyren: kaso vsrba.

**V. 6. for I delight in love (misericordiam).**

\"Love\" is first of all that which is offered to us, which we accept,
namely from God, and with which he does us good, then it is that which I
owe to my neighbor. Therefore the opinion is: This I have purposed
through the prophets who kill you \[v. 5\], that I might establish the
kingdom of mercy, that I might do you all good according to my mercy,
without your sacrifices and works.

**V. 8. Gilead is a city of idolatry.**

Gilead is a whole countryside, and not a city, and contemptuously he
calls the princes, the kings and their households, and even the whole
synagogue, \"the great Hansen,\" under the name of \"Gilead\" as a city,
because they are not worthy of the name of a countryside. - \"And blood
debts.\" The prophet attributes to this city that it had shed blood,
that

[1052 **D. XXIV. 117 f.** Notes on Hosea (2.), Cap. 6, 8-11. **W.** VI.
**I525-1S2S.** 1053]{.underline}

means it is trampled under by the blood and becomes guilty of the shed
blood.

V. 9. **i.e. priests together with their multitude.**

The priests in Bethel were so rebellious against God that they even
continued to commit robbery on the road leading from Shechem to
Jerusalem, namely, to prevent those who continued to sacrifice in the
house of the Lord. This passage is rightly understood of the Christians,
to whom the priests of the Jews refused Christianity, and even deterred
them from it with death penalties. And the same is this: as they commit
robbery in Shechem, so they deny admission here: Fauces virorum vel
latronum, the Hebrew text has: maw of the men of war or

of the foot people, and it is those who resist the gospel who forcefully
catch and corrupt the Chris part.

**V. 11. But Judah will still have a harvest ahead of them.**

He speaks of the return of the people, not from the Assyrian, nor from
the Babylonian, nor even from the Roman captivity, but from the
spiritual, in which they were as captives servile to idols and
ceremonies, so that the opinion is: Although many robbers resist, and
everywhere the way is occupied, nevertheless you will gather foreign
peoples, and you will be freed at the same time, however much the
robbers in Shechem oppose.

**The seventh chapter.**

In this chapter, the prophet seems to rebuke the false prophets who draw
the people, who had already been converted to God by Hosea, back to
idols, who persuade the princes and the people that the king of Assyria
is far away, that they have a gracious God and the right worship, and so
they make every word of this prophet vain. These \[false prophets\] the
prophet now attacks with the similitude of the oven and the baker who
bakes bread, as if to say: You false prophets turn the people away and
lead them to a false hope. You will be like the flour that the baker
leavened and prepared the oven, heating it and baking bread, when the
king of Assyria is already ready, comes and eats the bread. So you also
will be food for the king of Assyria.

**V. 1. howbeit they among themselves with thieves 2c. (Et fur ingressus
est \[spolians, latrunculus foris\]).**

Some interpret this from the enemies who rob secretly and in secret. But
it seems to be related to the false teachers

who deal in lies, stealing and robbing by innumerable lies, and disguise
themselves as angels of light. They enter under a shining guise and
first darken the hearts, after that they kill. \"Go thieves in and
murderers 1) out.\" They steal in the house, outside they rob, that is,
they make it their business to take away your goods.

V. 4. **and are all adulterers.**

The oven is heated by the Beckers and the dough is prepared for baking.
This is the likeness of their adultery. For the ungodly teachers heat
this oven, that is, they inflame the heart of the people, that they
cleave to the lie against the prophet. - \"When he hath kneaded out.\"
2) The opinion is: \"When

1\) Instead of \"against\" in the original we have\" assumed
\"murderer\" according to the previous writing. This is also suggested
by Weimar.

2\) In the original, the keyword here is: Osssavit sxvitars. Actually
should have been put: Huisvit should have been put, because that is
Luther\'s correction of the reading of the Vulgate. The old translator,
who did not recognize this, puts \"V. 6. ihr Becker schläft die ganze
Nacht\" as a keyword.

1054 L xxiv, 118-120. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 1528-1531.
1055

the oven is prepared, then the dough is kneaded and leavened, then it
stands still until \[the\] morning, then bread is made from it.\" The
translation makes the text dark. The prophet now wants to say: The
people are prepared by the godless teachers to be food for all the
Gentiles. They are safe because of all things, because the coming of the
king is delayed. Then the oven is heated, that is, if we now think that
we are safe, then the king comes and takes away us and all our goods.

**V. 8 Ephraim mingled with the nations.**

That is, Ephraim is mixed among the nations. A nation breaks over them,
and it will be scattered on all sides, \[it\] \"snatches (Reyß) everyone
from them\". For it has become the food of all nations, and there will
be no change with it, that is, this does not cease, so that the opinion
is: As long as the idols will not cease, so long will I not cease to
afflict (vorare - devour) you.

**V. 11. For Ephraim is like a tempted dove that does not want to notice
anything.**

The opinion is: It is seduced by the false prophets, so that it has no
more insight (cor). Thus you have in short words the summa of the whole
trade: All arbitrary things are persuaded to the poor people, but in
such a way that they judge nothing. For those false prophets have
deprived the people of all judgment, and have assigned the same to
themselves, as has happened to us today by the popes and priests. -
\"Now they call Egypt.\" They will give gifts to the Egyptians and the
Assyrians in order to defend themselves through them, and they will sit
in security, so that 1) they will think that they already ruled. I will
make them small, so that they will be caught unawares, and when they
will think that they are well armed by the help of men, I will suddenly
bring the king of Assyria, who will capture them.

**V. 12. I will punish them as one preaches in their gathering.**

1\) Instead of et we have assumed ut, because otherwise the conjunctive
xutsnt would not be explicable.

The \"preaching\" (auditus) here can be taken in an active or in a
suffering way. Jerome has taken it in an active way, so that the meaning
is: I will chastise them, because they rather hear one another than me.
For they said, Why should we not do so? The king, the prince, the
priest, the whole multitude of the people do so. God answers: I will
chastise both those who hear and those who teach. The meaning can also
be a passive one: I will chastise them according to what has been heard,
that is, according to the words with which I have threatened them, so
that the meaning is: As I have said through the prophets that they will
perish, so it will happen; I will not change anything in my judgment,
since they will not change anything in their lives.

**V. 14. So they do not call me either.**

Since you do not call from the heart, it is a real howl before me,
however holy and godly what you shout may be. If it does not come from
the heart, you mock and blaspheme me through it. - \"For corn\'s sake
and Moshi\'s.\" This passage has been twisted by the sophists to the
sacrament of the altar, who immediately refer everything that is only
about wine and bread to it. The opinion is: \"All their striving is that
they seek the temporal. Their crying does not seek my honor, but their
belly, as David clearly describes in the 4th Psalm \[v. 8\].

**V. 15. I teach them and strengthen their arm.**

Until now they have learned from me, sought advice from me; I have given
everything that was needed. But now they teach themselves new doctrines
and new laws, they strengthen themselves with their arm and flesh, and
seek help from Egypt.

**V. 16. They are like a false bow.**

The expression that the people are called a bow occurs frequently in
Scripture. We are a bow of the Lord, if we walk in pure faith and have
the word of the Lord. Therefore, when He fights through us against the
ungodly and unbelieving, we are a bow and arrow to Him. Therefore

1056 xxiv, 120-122. notes on Hosea (2.), cap. 8, 1-9. W. vi, 1531-1533.
1057

this is the opinion of this passage: The people have completely
alienated themselves from me, so that I cannot use them against the
ungodly, but they, themselves have already become ungodly from godly
people, so much so that I needed others, whom I would like to use as a
bow. - \"Their princes shall fall by the sword.\" Because they let me
call in vain through my prophets, not only will the people fall, but
also the

Most select, both princes and elders. - \"Their dread shall become
mockery.\" Jerome interprets it of the sin in Egypt. But I understand it
thus: they will fall on the sword of the Assyrians; it will not help
them that they want to protect themselves with human counsel against
God. \"Behold, these are the Junkers, who \[are\] forsaking Egypt. So
they will be mocked,\" because they wanted to bring help from Egypt
against the Assyrians.

**The eighth chapter.**

Again, the Spirit admonishes the prophet to stop, not to cease calling
the people back, lest they seek outside help.

**V. 1. Shout loudly, like a trumpet.**

\"Only rebuke confidently,\" for they need great rebuke. Stop with a
loud voice, that they may be called back, and not hear the false
prophets any more. - \"He is already coming over the house of the Lord
like an eagle.\" Here I confess my ignorance. For I do not do myself
justice with this text. One must assume here an ellipsis, that is, a
lack both of words and of speech: Lift up thy voice, that it may be like
an eagle 2c. These are words of a threatener: \"Behold, there is
something\", that even the house of the Lord will not be safe in
Jerusalem. And the enemy will come like an eagle, that is, the swift and
predatory king who spares no one, not even in the house of the LORD, so
much the less will he spare you who want to be safe in BethAven and in
the other places of your idolatry.

**V. 5. Your calf, Samaria, he rejected.**

He calls the calf of Samaria the calf of Bethaven, as you can see from
what was said above about Jezreel. He names Samaria because it was the
head of the kingdom, there was the supremacy. I do not know if the
prophet wants to indicate that a new calf service had been established.

I like that better, that he means the old service, which he
contemptuously calls a calf service; he does not dignify it with the
name of GOD.

**V. 7. for they sow wind.**

\"Sowing wind\" is said after a proverbial. It is said after a literal
figure, which we refer to all futile actions. As if he wanted to say:
They sow nothing, but meanwhile they mean that they sow. Later, when it
has come to death, that is, to the harvest, they will reap the fruit of
their labor, namely, stubble, death and evil conscience. Foolish work,
useless reward. Your hope will be deceived, according to which you
expect a fruit of your idolatry.

**\[v. 8. Israel is eaten up 2c.\]**

For the calf will become refuse. The king of Assyria will visit this
calf and make the whole land desolate, and they will be scattered and
will be among the nations; they will be moved and will no longer be in
the land, but will live miserably among the Gentiles.

**V. 9. Ephraim is like a deer going astray (*solitarius*).**

This \"wild\" (onager) is described in Job \[Cap. 6, 5. 11, 12. 24, 5.
39, 5.\] and is the forest donkey, which is especially afraid of contact
with humans. He even adds emphatically: \"lonely\" to indicate the
peculiarity that matters to him.

[1058 L. xxiv, IW-I24. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
isss-isss. 1059]{.underline}

As if he wanted to say: My Ephraim is lonely, that is, he has thrown
away my law, he does not respect my commandments, he no longer wants to
be an ass under the yoke; he has thrown off the burden, he breaks out
into the freedom of the flesh, he prescribes the laws for himself,
chooses kings. - \"Ephraim giveth tribute to the wooers.\" That is, they
give tribute to those in whom they trust, they govern themselves, they
unite with the heathen; with their treasures, with their wealth they
want to protect themselves; they do not need my help.

**V. 11: For Ephraim has made much of the mire.**

I have never been able to admonish Ephraim to refrain from building
altars. \"The more

I preach against it, the more they set up.\" It not only sets up sinful
altars, but also puts them into use, so that it may go out 1) to the
work for which they are ordained, namely, that sin may be committed
there.

**V. 12. If I write to him the same amount of my law.**

Although I have clearly prescribed my law, although I have done this
many times and often, they always reverse it, they twist it to their
sense, they always give it another name. \"They make him a waxen nose.\"

1\) Instead of extzeretur we have assumed exeeäat.

**The ninth chapter.**

The prophet stays with the threat of future captivity and takes away the
trust and help on which they rely. He goes against their security, in
which they vainly believe that there will be peace as long as they
depart from the law of the Lord.

V. 1. **you seek whores\' wages** (**mercedem**).

\"Reward\" means, as above in the second chapter \[v. 12\], abundance
and fullness of temporal things. That is, you hoped for a rich reward
for your worship; that is what you seek. You have hoped for abundance of
all things, and this you seek to earn by your worship, but your hope
will fail you and lie to you. Your winepress will deceive your hope; it
will give less than you hoped for. Even if everything is superfluous, it
will disappear under your hands, so that you will not know where it will
go.

V. 4: **In which all who eat of it become unclean.**

It is written in the fifth book of Moses \[Cap. 16, 10. III that when
the tithes are paid, the

When the sacrifices were made, they were to be made with the utmost joy
and gladness, and it was not proper to offer anything in sadness.
Therefore, the prophet says here: They will sacrifice in sorrow, and
will not be able to be joyful because of their servitude. Therefore,
even the sacrifices will be defiled by sorrow.

**V. 7. the prophets are fools (Cognoscet Israel stultum
prophetam**[).]{.underline}

That is, you do as the wicked do and condemn the godly prophets, who are
foolish and nonsensical in your eyes, and you hate them with great
hatred. But you will know how foolish or how lying I have been against
you. I am true, but because of your godlessness or wickedness I must be
a liar, but you will know how false I am.

**V. 8. lay the ropes (Laqueus aucupis factus sum**[).]{.underline}

Here he speaks of the punishment, not of the guilt, so that one must
interpret it in an active way: I have become a rope that catches them.
Or it can be understood in a suffering way: You will punish the prophet

[1060 xxiv. 124-12\". Notes on Hosea (2.), cap. 9, 8-15. **W.** vi,
**1538-1539.** 1061]{.underline}

you will also get to know the snare. And you have hated this prophet in
the house of God, that is, in my people. You will know who he was,
whether he spoke true or false.

**V. 9. They spoil it too deeply.**

You were so stubborn that you resisted the very good prophet, and it was
he who wanted to untie you and free you from the already existing anger;
meanwhile he had to be your rope. You hated the one who was worthy of
love. But He will punish you like the wicked in Gibeah, Judges chapter
19.

**V. 11. Therefore the glory of Ephraim must fly away like a bird.**

The prophet begins to speak about the punishment of barrenness among
people. Until now you have been fruitful, but you will be made
unfruitful, since the time of captivity is already present. The prophet
does not say that all will continue to be barren, but that there will
not be such a great glory of fruitfulness, rather it will become lonely
and disgraceful.

**V. 12. Woe to them, too, when I have departed from them!**

Some think that the prophet here makes the transition from the physical
kingdom to the spiritual one, so that the opinion would be: Woe to them
when my incarnation will have departed from them. But I think that this
is the opinion of the prophet: I will kill their descendants, they shall
be completely miserable in their descendants. But woe will befall them
when I will have completely departed from them and allow this remnant,
which is still left to them of their descendants, to be oppressed most
severely in the servitude of the Assyrians.

**V. 15. For the sake of their evil nature.**

Since the wrath of God is proclaimed to the people of Israel without
mercy, it must be understood that God does not want to have mercy, that
He wants to destroy their temporal kingdom. But there are several
passages in this prophet that clearly teach of God\'s mercy toward
Jerusalem, and I understand this from that in the spiritual realm.

**The tenth chapter.**

This chapter seems to be preached at the time of Hosea, the last king,
who recognized the error, but in the meantime increased the sacrifices.
Therefore, the prophet insists on the captivity of Israel, although he
sees that some wanted to pretend something of repentance and
reformation, but they do not strive with real zeal to improve
themselves, and go so far that they even restored the godless
pretensions, set up new services, with which they offended God more and
more.

**V. 1. Israel is a devastated vine.**

The Hebrew word means \"desolate,\" not: leafy (frondosa, \[Vulg.\]),
although I would prefer to read \"leafy\" because the following

The text seems to be very consistent with it and the meaning is clear:
Israel is a vine in his land, which he has planted and spread wide, but
what fruit it brings I see, namely idolatry. When one runs \"desolate,\"
this is the opinion, \"It is a beautiful vine, but useless.\" The
godless people made sure that where the land was best, a worship would
be set up. Where there is good income, there are godless services.
Godlessness has always built its nest where there is food for the belly.

1\) In the previous writing, the same explanation is given for the
reading krouäosa. The Hallic manuscript offers for vastata: It is indeed
a vine, but devastated or withered, that is, useless.

1062 xxiv. 126-128. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 1539-1541.
1063

**V. 6. So Ephraim must stand with shame.**

That is to say, with a lot of advice, they protect their calves. They
are stubborn in their resolution, they follow their advice. Therefore,
they will die while defending themselves most stubbornly, and both the
service and the one who practices it will perish.

**V. 7. The king of Samaria is gone.**

The Hebrew word dum or damem (orig.: dumb) has two meanings: to be
silent and to be similar. In sum, we always use this word for things
that are lost and made to nothing.

**V. 8: The high places of Aven are destroyed.**

It alludes to the name BethAven, which means the high places will be
destroyed. For \"Aven\" means sin, which anguishes and troubles the
conscience. \"The high places\" means the altars, the idolatrous
services performed on mountains and hills. - \"And shall say to the
mountains.\" The Lord uses this text in the Gospel of Luke \[Cap. 23,
30\], where he mentions the last judgment. It is, therefore, a general
saying, as if to say, \"There shall be a woe, that thou knowest not
whither out.\" It can also be applied to any future calamity. Hosea
draws it to the Assyrian captivity, Christ to the Roman captivity, we to
the last judgment. So it can also be interpreted here, that in the
meantime the opinion of the prophet remains unharmed.

**V. 9. since the time of Gibeah.**

It is another beginning by which he seeks to call them to bear fruit. It
is the opinion: \"What shall I say much? It is a

old büberei. You have never done any good all your life; lift up and do
some good for once.\"

**V. 11. Ephraim is a calf, accustomed 2c.**

As a cow only 1) works for its food, so you, Ephraim, seek only temporal
things with this service of yours. You serve God only for the sake of
the earthly. The prophet seems to want to emphasize that there is great
work in the ungodly service. But they like this service so much that
they easily overcome all difficulties \[because they are used to it\] 2)
as a calf of its own free will would not thresh but eat if it were not
forced. But I will break your neck, so beautiful and well cared for,
that is, I will give you into servitude, I will hand you over to the
king of Assyria for punishment.

**V. 14: Just as Salman has transgressed (Sicut vastatur pacifica**

Just as he who dwells securely in his house, fears nothing, sees
everything safe, but is suddenly killed by invading enemies, both he and
his wife and children, so will it be 3) with you. While you will be in
the highest security, the king will come and destroy you. It is the way
of the scripture that it touches the old histories briefly, but does not
tell what happened. This is what the prophet does here. He gives a
history which is not recorded, but it seems to be such: Salman was a
king who disturbed the house of Arbeel by a tyrannical murder, killing
both the mother and the children.

1\) Instead of camouflage will read tantnin.

2\) Inserted by us.

3\) Weimarsche: est instead of: et; a misprint.

[1064 mv, **128 f.** Notes on Hosea (2.), cap. 11, 6-11. **W. VI,
154I-IS43.** 1065]{.underline}

**The eleventh chapter.**

He tells them that idolatry is an ingrained evil, and (as the prophet
Isaiah \[Cap. 48, 8.\] 1) says: \"From the womb you are called a
transgressor.\" \"Sin has accustomed them from their mother\'s womb.\"
You started idolatry when you came out of Egypt and even today you do
not desist from it.

V. 6. **Therefore the sword shall come upon their cities.**

For the king of Assyria had taken many cities, even the whole tribe of
Naphtali, before he entered their land.

V. 7. **My people are tired of turning to me.**

You will never be free from this yoke with which I oppress you, so you
will be servile. Always understand it in a temporal way. But when I
return, that is, when I have sent my Son into the world, then you will
be able to repent and thus be saved spiritually.

V. 9. **that I will not do according to my fierce anger.**

Though I shall be mightily afflicted, yet will I that the name of mercy
may remain uninjured unto me, and I will not exercise my wrath as a man
that knoweth no bounds of his wrath, whose indignation is not satisfied,
except his adversaries be brought to ruin from the foundation of the
world. Of this you have an example in the suffering of Christ. The Jews
were not satisfied that the

1\) Weimar edition erroneously: \"Esaj. 49, 1\".

Man Christ was miserable, lowly and rejected, they wanted to exterminate
him from the ground up, even by the most cruel death. Therefore he says
here: I will not act foolishly like a man, but I will punish as God,
whose own it is to have mercy.

**V. 10. He will roar like a lion.**

The whole scripture compares the roaring of the lion with the voice of
the gospel. Thus it is said in Amos \[Cap. 3, 8.\], \"The lion roareth,
who shall not be afraid?\" Now this is the lion that shall roar for his
young, for his children, 2) of the tribe of Judah. Therefore this lion
will roar against all the wicked and those who resist him, so much so
that he will also threaten them with all terrible punishments if they do
not stop resisting him.

**V. 11. And those in Egypt will also be terrified (avolabunt).**

By Assyria and Egypt he understands the Gentiles, whom he will call to
the Gospel along with the Jews, as if to say, \"Not ye alone, but the
Gentiles also shall follow the Gospel; there shall be One Shepherd and
One Flock. - \"Into their houses.\" That is, \"into the houses where
they enter\" (inker), not which they themselves have built or chosen, 3)
but which I will give, that is, into the Church to which I will give My
gifts.

2\) In the editions a comma is missing here, which is nevertheless
necessary, because \"the lion from the tribe Juda\" belongs together.

3\) Instead of a1\>6A6r8nt in our template, we assumed Z6riut.

[1066 L. XXIV. I29-I3I. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
IS44-IS46. 1067]{.underline}

**The twelfth chapter.**

The twelfth chapter begins with the words: 1) \"In Ephraim is
everywhere\" 2c., because here a new sermon begins, then also because
the same is continuous thereafter, and such a one that cannot be
separated. He provokes Ephraim to repentance by the comparison with
Judah, because this was still healthy. For it was then (as I believe)
under the king Hezekiah, who ruled according to the word of God and
walked according to God\'s will.

**V. 1. and at the right holy service**

(Cum sanctis fidelibus).

Lyra explains this passage according to some rabbi and cites an opinion
that seems good to me: that sanctis is in the plural and means GOD. For
the Scripture often calls GOD in the plural, as in Joshua \[Cap. 24, 19.
according to the Hebrew): \"For our GOtt is holy\" (sancti). So it is a
repetition: cum sanctis, that is, with the holy, faithful GOtte, because
GOt is faithful and keeps His covenant that He made with us. Here the
faith of King Hezekiah is touched upon, who trusted in GOD, therefore He
was also merciful and faithful to him.

**V. 4. Yes (they say), he undercut his brother in the womb.**

How Jacob trampled his brother in the womb and fought with the angel,
read in the first book of Moses \[Cap. 27, 36. and 32, 24. ff.). But why
the prophet has mentioned these histories of Jacob, since this does not
rhyme with the text, all interpreters are in doubt. I like this opinion
that the prophet always inculcates past deeds of God when preaching.
This is frequent in the Psalms and in Isaiah. Thus they spin 2) from the
praise of the past deeds praise for the present ones. And it is

1\) In the Vulgate, the first verse of the 12th chapter is still
included in the 11th chapter, which is why Luther makes this remark. The
old translator has omitted it.

2\) Instead of dkxant. in the original, read (as the Weim. edition
suggests) bexunb.

the sense: \"Ephraim is everywhere lie against me\", it invents
services, while it should see only that it worshipped the God whom Jacob
worshipped. As if to say: Let us look at the example of our father
Jacob, let us consider what he did and how he did it. If you want to
imitate his works, imitate his faith also. How could he have subdued his
brother, who was still in his mother\'s womb, but by God alone and by a
sincere faith in Him? He always expected the will of God; what He
commanded, he did by trusting in His word. Therefore, if you want to be
Jacob\'s children, let God work in you, not you. When He commands you to
build an altar and worship, do it, trusting in His word.

V. 6. The **LORD is his name.**

This name alone comes to GOtte in Scripture; it is frequent in Scripture
and always actually refers to GOtte.

V. 7. **Turn therefore to your God.**

You must cling to the Lord and hold on to him,\" not flee to the
Egyptians, be sure of his good will. Therefore you are liars indeed,
forsaking his promises and, not following the example of your father
Jacob, you turn to idols and to a strange god.

V. 8. The **merchant has a false scale in his hand.**

The prophet speaks here in images: \'You are like a merchant in whose
hand is a false scale, who loves deceit, \"who does wrong to people\",
who deals only with becoming rich, to the detriment of all others. Thus
the godless teachers teach only that by which they themselves may grow
fat, and their bellies increase, while others meanwhile die miserably of
hunger.

1068 **L. XXIV, 131 f.** Notes on Hosea (2.), Cap. 12 u. 13. **W. VI,
1546-1549**. 1069

**V. 12. In Gilead it is idolatry.**

The order of this prophecy must be taken from the movement of the heart.
Above \[v. 8.\] he had said that Israel was like a deceitful merchant,
but He was the true God. Immediately he returns to the enumeration of
the punishments. It seems that the prophet here touches upon some
history that is not written, which was perhaps such that these two
peoples in Gilead and Gilgal gave preference to each other, so that each
of them wanted to have a holier (religiosiorem) worship, like with us
the barefooted (minoritae \[Franciscans\]) and the observant, so that
the opinion is: You who are in Gilgal, hate those in Gilead, \"and one
is even as pious as the others.\" Gilead is a region of land on the
other side of the Jordan, Gilgal on this side. 1)

1\) In the original and in the editions: OalaaL reZio eis \^oräaiiem,
OalZula inkra. We have made the above change (in agreement with the
previous editors). Neither the Erlangen nor the Weimar editions note
anything about the incorrectness.

**V. 13. Jacob had to flee to the land of Syria.**

He contrasts the example of the exceedingly faithful father with the
exceedingly godless children. Jacob served for his wife and tended the
cattle, because 2) so this good man had to serve the people 3). But you,
whom I have brought out of Egypt through the prophets, cannot and will
not serve God, who has done so well for you. He, your father Jacob,
served the Lord among evil men and strangers and remained faithful, but
you refuse to serve GOtte\^ in a well prepared kingdom and since you
have all abundance; therefore you are not children of this father, but
untimely births and bastardy.

2\) Instead of peouniam in the original, as the Weimar edition suggests,
pecu nam will have to be read.

3\) It seems to us that pro should be erased before tiominidus.

**The thirteenth chapter.**

Again, a new sermon begins because the prophet sees new sacrifices, new
services, as if he wanted to say: The people have not had enough of the
fact that they have sinned up to now, but set up a new service so that
they may continue to sin.

**V. 2. He who wants to kiss the calves.**

The kiss is a sign of worship, so by the word \"kiss\" he means worship,
the honor they paid to the idols. The people also sacrificed their
dearest children to the idol, because they thought they were doing God a
service. They concluded that Abraham wanted to sacrifice his son. By
this act he pleased God especially: why should we not please God by
doing the same? See where examples without faith lead!

**V. 3. These will have the morning cloud.**

You reign, and the glory of your preaching is great. This service is as
sweet to us as the morning dew. Here the prophet describes the sweetness
and bliss that s\^the people have from the godly service. 4)

**V. 14. I will deliver them from hell.**

\"Hell\" is often taken in Scripture to mean death. \"The thing that
takes away the soul\" from this life. 5)

4\) Here is the exact opposite of what the first redaction offers.

5\) With this remark, which also does not agree with the previous
writing, this relation breaks off.

1070 \". xxiv, iM f. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, 1550-1566.
1071

**3. interpretation of the prophet Hosea,**

recited by D. Martin Luther in public lectures and later overlooked by
himself; compiled by Veit Dietrich. \*)

Published 1545.

Newly translated from the Latin.

Preface on the Prophet Hosea.

From the reading of the prophets and the content of the sermons of
Hosea.

The knowledge of the prophets is very necessary in the church, because
they faithfully inculcate the doctrine of the fear of God, since they
punish idolatry, trust in men, ungodly doctrines, avarice and clearly
indicate the punishments of these sins among their people. And they also
teach about faith in Christ, comforting the afflicted with the sweetest
prophecies of the future kingdom of Christ. Therefore, not only do the
apostles often use the testimonies of the prophets, but the Son of God
himself admonishes us in more than one place to be diligent in reading
them.

Therefore, those who think that there is nothing in the prophets but old
sermons that cannot be used in our time are not only inconsistent, but
also quite foolish. For why does Christ use the testimony of Hosea
twice, and in the most important matters? Because Matth. 9, 13. deals
with the ministry of Christ, that he had dealt with sinners. In another
place \[Matth. 12, 7.\] he disputes against the Pharisees, that it is
the most pleasing sacrifice for God, if we take the need of others to
heart and do not judge others sacrilegiously. But how appropriately used

\*) This writing was first published in 1545 in Wittenberg by Johannes
Lufft under the title: In Hoseam Prophetam Reverendi D. Martini Lutheri
Doctoris Theologiae Enarratio, ab ipso et in publicis praelectionibus
tradita, et postea recognita, Collecta per Vitum Theodorum
Noribergensem, Plena piae doctrinae et salutarium consolationum.
VVittenbergae Excudebat Iohannes Lufft, Anno M.D.XL V.; then a reprint
was published under the same title in 1546 by Peter Brubach at
Frankfurt; both editions in octavo. In the original edition, the title
is followed by a dedication by Veit Dietrich to Prince Georg zu Anhalt,
Coadjutor zu Merseburg 2c., It is very lengthy (in the Wittenberg
edition four and a half folio pages), and only a few things in it are of
interest to us, namely that Dietrich says in it that Luther had
presented this interpretation in public lecture, and that it had been
brought together (collsstarQ) by learned men, Caspar Cruciger, Georg
Rörer and himself, and after it had been arranged by him (oräins
\"eripta), had been overlooked by Luther himself. \"Therefore,\" he
says, \"let the readers know that this interpretation is a genuine
(\>v\^Mv) work of the venerable D. Martin Luther, which, as I have no
doubt, will be very agreeable to the learned and to all the godly.\"
This is followed by a Latin translation of the prophet Hosea, which is
followed by an epigram by Ll. Joachim Heller, schoolmaster in Nuremberg,
which consists of eighteen distichs. Then follows the interpretation
itself, further \"a compilation of the most important passages and
sayings from the sermons of the prophet Hosea\", and at the end \"Martin
Luther\'s addition to the passage of Hosea Cap. 13, 14: Death, I will be
a poison to thee 2c.\" Dietrich says nothing about the time when these
lectures were held, therefore, since it is not known that Luther read
about the minor prophets for the second time, various speculations have
been made about it. From the passage in the interpretation of Cap. 1, 3
(DrI. sxss. opp. XXIV, 185): \"The patrons of this (spiritual)
fornication and of the so shameful adultery are nowadays the bishops.
Their assistants and satellites find the godless teachers, the obtuse
people like Cochläus, the screamers and drunkards like Eck, the mangy
people like Pighius, the hypocrites like Witzel and all that is of the
same ilk,\" concludes Seckendorf, nist. Dutll, Ub. Ill, p. 583, 8127,
that the interpretation must have begun during the lifetime of Eck and
Pighius, who died in 1543; but from the fact that Cap. 14, 4. mentions
the imprisonment of Hieronymus Baumgärtner (DrI. 6X6K. OM., XXIV, 496),
he concludes that this was recited in 1544 (idiä. r\>. 587), but not
printed until later. Köstlin expresses (Mart. Luther \[3j, Vol. II, p.
272) the opinion that between the years 1530 and 1534 new lectures on
the prophets Hosea, Micah and also probably Joel are to be assumed, but
has this

[1072 D.LLiv,i66f. Interpretation of Hosea (3.). Preface. W.vi,!S66f.
1073]{.underline}

Paul\'s testimony of this prophet in the first letter to the Corinthians
Cap. 15, 55, where he preaches that the resurrection of the dead will
surely take place. In this way, one could also cite sayings of other
prophets by which both the Son of God Himself and the apostles, His
servants, confirm the noblest teachings of the New Testament. But since
we have now undertaken to interpret Hosea, I have preferred to use the
testimonies of this one, so that the readers may have him all the more
commanded, and all may recognize that we are right to spend our labor in
interpreting him.

And indeed, in our time the distress of the church requires a diligent
reading of the prophets, so that the godly may look to the promises of
the kingdom of Christ, which the prophets of the ancient church praised
so gloriously. For in so many and so great tribulations, what else is
there to raise us up and comfort us, but that, though we are oppressed
and in many ways suffer

We hope that after so many accidents, after so many dangers, we will
attain the victory of Christ, by which he has overcome death and
destroyed hell, as Hosea promises in the thirteenth chapter \[v. 14\].
For if this hope be put out of sight, what is there that can comfort a
Christian heart? For Paul rightly says in the very same discussion in
which he uses the testimony of our prophet \[1 Cor. 15:19\] that we are
the most miserable of all men if we hope in Christ in this life alone,
and do not have the certain hope of the life to come and eternal firmly
in our hearts.

Therefore, even though the prophets awaited with the greatest sorrow the
misfortune threatening their people, and the ungodly mengel

1\) Erlanger: multitudiiiS instead of: rrmltitudini.

(Weim. Ausg., Bd. XIII, p. XXXI1), and now agrees with the assumption of
the Erlanger (exssopp., XXIV, 138) and the Weimar edition that Luther
read only once about the minor prophets in the years 1524 to 1526. Also
we can come to no other result. The things that point to a later time
may have been added either by Luther himself during the revision or
possibly by Veit Dietrich. For it was not at all uncommon for the latter
to take such liberties in editing Luther\'s writings. But we have to be
content with the fact that Luther acknowledged this writing as his work,
and we can not help but attribute to it the superiority over the two
preceding relations. In a letter to Georg Mohr, to whom he gave this
interpretation of the prophet Hosea as a gift, Luther says (Oct. 16,
1545): \"I send you as a sign of my love and due respect this small
gift, but the great prophet Hosea, which is interpreted by my work and
God\'s gift.\" (De Wette, Vol. V, 761.) The Basel print, of which Luther
undoubtedly received knowledge, has not only remained unnoticed by him,
but has also (with full justification) not been considered worthy of
inclusion by the editors of the old collections of Luther\'s writings,
and, as we \"believe,\" the Zwickau manuscript would not have fared any
better. We have included them because of the archaeological interest
they have; their practical value is low. Who would be served today with
the transcription of a lecture without it first having been thoroughly
revised? We have wanted to note this because the Erlangen edition
(sxe\^. opx., toru. XXIV, p. 4) states that Dietrich\'s Ausleguug is a
\"genuine\" work of Luther, the Basel edition a \"more genuine\" one,
the Zwickau manuscript \"the most genuine\". The Weimar edition
expresses itself in a similar way, placing Veit Dietrich almost on the
same level as Aurifaber in his treatment of Luther\'s writings (Weim.
Ausg., vol. XIII, p. XXX). But how highly Luther respected Veit Dietrich
we see from the fact that he wrote to him in February 1532 that he might
think of writing the preface to the Prophets in case of his death
(Köstlin, M. Luther, vol. II, 271. De Wette, vol. IV, 341). In the
collections, our writing is found in Latin in the Wittenberg (1552),
torri. IV, col. 391; in the Jena (1570), tom. IV, iol. 586 d and in the
Erlangen, 6XSA. opp., torri. XXIV, p. 135. Only in the Wittenberg
edition are all the pieces printed in full as in the original edition;
in the Erlanger Dietrich\'s preface and Heller\'s epigram are omitted,
as well as in the Jena edition, in which the Latin translation of Hosea
has also not appeared. Friedrich Dracksteot translated our scripture
into German. This translation is found in the Wittenberg (1556), vol.
VIII, p. 233 b; in the Altenburg, vol. VIII, p. 593 and in the Leipzig,
vol. VIII, p. 1. In the Wittenberg and in the Altenburg, the attribution
of Veit Dietrich has been omitted, as well as \"Luther\'s addition to
Hosea 13, 14.\"The Wittenberg edition motivates the latter omission
thus: \"What follows from this saying in Latin belongs to the erring,
not to the German reader, therefore we have knowingly left it out. The
Leipzig edition had these two pieces translated and reinserted. Walch
already judged Drackstedt\'s translation to be \"badly done\", which is
why much of his edition was improved from the Latin. We leave
Dietrich\'s preface as unimportant, but give a new translation of our
writing after the Latin Erlangen edition, comparing the Wittenberg and
Jena editions.

[1074 L. XXIV. 167-169. interpretationm tzber the prophets. W. VI.
1S67-IS71. 1075]{.underline}

with a right zeal, they are nevertheless, as often as they come to those
prophecies of the kingdom of Christ, suddenly imbued with joy, and lose
their displeasure and all feeling of human unhappiness. For what should
he fear, what should he refuse all the adversity that this life has,
what should he have to complain about who knows that God is reconciled
through Christ and firmly believes that he is called to the fellowship
of Christ\'s merits?

Therefore, in these troubled times, which threaten not only the secular
regime but also the church, the sermons of the prophets are held up to
the congregations for their benefit, not only so that the godly may be
comforted by a certain similarity of events, but also so that they may
form the treasures of Christ\'s kingdom more deeply in their hearts, of
which they see that they were so gloriously praised by the prophets,
although they did not yet see them as having appeared, as we do today,
but believed that they would be communicated to the world after many
years.

But because the church in this life is such a body, which has many frail
members, the reading of the prophets is also useful for this reason,
because they contain many and serious sermons of punishment. 1) For
although Christ and the apostles also threaten the evildoers and
severely punish the vices, the sermons of the prophets are more suitable
to deter the wicked and more effective to inculcate the fear of God,
because they always add certain punishments of the evildoers, of which
the outcome afterwards showed that they were not in vain. And this was
also the reason why the office of the prophets was such a difficult one.
For Jonah was not only commanded to bring the Ninevites back on the
right path and to exhort them to the right worship and holy life, but he
also received the command that he should proclaim in advance that they
would perish within forty days.

In this way Hosea not only instructs the kingdom of Israel about right
worship, and calls them back from idolatry,

1\) Instead of trabet in the editions should probably be read babent.

but also threatens them with the certainty that the Assyrian will come
and destroy everything with sword and fire; but the people will remain
captive among the Gentiles, even after that they will not have the
glorious name that they are the people of God. But if we compare the
histories, the success proves that the prophet did not lie.

Therefore, there is a great difference between the teachers of the New
Testament and the prophets. This does not apply to the doctrine, because
both punish the ungodly being and teach the faith in Christ, also both
threaten the sinners with punishment. But the prophets have certain
revelations of certain punishments that are to be executed at a certain
time by certain people. We nowadays only threaten the godless world in
general, nor do we have a certain revelation whether God will visit our
godlessness through the Turk or through other destruction. However, the
prophets are excellent witnesses for these threats, which we present to
the wicked in general. Therefore, they are extremely useful to dissuade
people from sins and to lead them to the fear of God.

But after we have spoken of the sermons of the prophets in general, we
must now speak of Hosea in particular. In which time he lived, he
indicates himself in the title, because he names the kings, in whose
time he was in office. Amos and Jesaias were also at the time of Uzziah,
but Amos seems to be older, Jesaias younger, because it is believed that
he lived until the time of Manasseh and was killed by him. But Hosea is
thought to have been in office earlier than either Micah or Isaiah. And
there is a passage, 2 Kings 14:25, which shows that Hosea was the first
to proclaim the desolation of the kingdom of Israel with Amos, then with
Micah and Isaiah, for this passage speaks of the time of Jeroboam king
of Israel: \"And the LORD had not said that he would blot out the name
of Israel from under heaven. Therefore, for this reason also, the
ministry of Hosea was more dangerous, because he made threats never
heard before among that people, that the ten tribes should be utterly
disturbed.

1076 **L. XXIV, 189-171.** interpretation of Hosea (3.). Preface. **W.
VI. I57I-1S74.** 1077

Here we are first reminded of how much God cares for the Church, since
He gave such great men at that time, when the kingdom of Israel was
already threatened with extreme devastation because of the sin of
idolatry. Therefore, these four prophets also give a living testimony of
God today that he is in truth such a God who does not want the death of
the sinner, but like a good shepherd seeks the lost sheep through his
word, so that it will convert and live. Therefore, the stubborn
godlessness of people is all the more to be deplored, who do not heed
the advice and daily calls of this so kind Father, but continue in sins
until God is finally forced to destroy them, as He threatened through
His word at the time of the visitation.

Therefore, the so many godly reminders with which we nowadays call the
godless papacy and the obdurate state of the bishops to wholesome
teaching and godly services will not be in vain, and also those who
dishonor the gospel with their godless life will suffer their
punishment. For this reason Amos, Hosea, Micah and Isaiah are sent, so
that the people, out of fear of the wrath to come, may desist from
idolatry and adhere to the right worship. But because the kingdom of
Israel certainly does not respect the godly admonishers, and the
contempt of the word is added to the other sins, it receives the
deserved punishments for its godlessness. Also the kingdom of Judah, in
which the right service of God was, although not completely destroyed,
was plagued by Assyria in various ways, until it was finally completely
devastated by the Babylonians, as Micah and Isaiah prophesy.

It is useful to look at these examples so that we may remember that God
did not give the light of His Word to the German land at this time in
vain. For a great calamity will indeed follow if the bishops and kings
continue to oppose the Gospel in this way, and the rest of the common
people do not desist from their avarice, their splendor, their
fornication and other vices, which at all times have been certain signs
of future changes.

The first two years of the new system have been a long time in the
making.

Since the time in which Hosea lived is known from the title, the reader
would do well to take a good look at the deeds of the kings he names,
but especially at the history of the kingdom of Israel. For there the
causes of the great misfortune are told, although the prophet also
diligently mentions them. For he expressly indicates that he has to deal
with the kingdom of Israel mainly because, although it was also stained
with other sins in many ways, it nevertheless did not put an end to
idolomaniae. For the first king Jeroboam, contrary to the word of God,
had established a special worship in the kingdom of Israel by setting up
the calves, while the whole nation was commanded not to sacrifice other
than in Jerusalem and in the temple. To this idolatry Ahab had added the
service of Baal on the mountain in Samaria.

Although Jeroboam, whose reign Hosea commemorates here, was quite
blissful in his reign, the prophet nevertheless threatens his
descendants with destruction because he maintained the idolatrous
worship that had been established by \[Jeroboam\] the son of Nebat. For
with his son Zechariah \[2 Kings 15:8, 10\] the lineage of Jehu expired,
and the kingdom was plagued by long and severe turmoil and unrest, until
at last the tribe of Naphtali was led away captive by the Assyrian
ThiglathPilesser. The rest of the empire, however, was severely plagued
and finally captured and devastated by Salmanasser. This is the end of
idolatry, this the reward for the godless worship, for the suppression
of right doctrine and for the shameful acts of murder and cruelty
against the prophets.

Therefore Hosea has this as something special before the other prophets,
that he punishes the idolatry the most, which he calls adultery and
fornication with a shameful name, so that he may deter the godly from
such a great, abominable sin. Even in our times, for this reason, this
lecture is extremely appropriate, so that we, well warned, may flee the
godless church of the Pope, which is full of

1078 xxiv, 171-174. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1574-1578.
1079

is from idolatrous services. For I do not agree with those who think
that the papists should be left alone in their evil nature, and call it
moderation if someone does not attack them often in his sermons. For if
the purity of doctrine is to be preserved, and the people are to be
commanded to worship rightly, then it is the duty of all godly teachers
by necessity to instruct the people often about the shamefulness of the
godless doctrine in the papacy and about the penalties of false worship.
For even simple-minded people can judge the other sins. However, the
common people not only do not recognize the real pestilence of the
church, but also hear that it is adorned by false prophets with
glittering praises. Therefore it is fitting that godly teachers follow
the example of Hosea, that they punish idolatrous worship with great
seriousness and draw the listeners to the right doctrine. For Hosea
preached his sermons in this manner.

But so that the godly, who have not bowed their knees to Baal, would not
be without all comfort in such great public dangers, he frequently
intersperses exceedingly lovely descriptions of the kingdom of Christ.
He also adds prophecies of the downfall of the synagogue, which
stubbornly held on to the Mosaic ceremonies and rejected the teaching of
the Gospel.

In the sixth and thirteenth chapters, he remembers the resurrection of
the dead and the life to come. And everywhere he attacks the false
prophets who sat against the right teachers and invited people to
idolatry. These are the main parts of this prophecy, which the prophet
concludes with a magnificent exhortation to repentance, so that the
people may recognize their sins and accept the gospel, in which the
forgiveness of sins through Christ is offered.

This may be enough about the reading of the prophets and about the
sermons of this prophet, now let us interpret the text in order.

**The first chapter.**

**V. 1. This is the word of the Lord that came to Hosea the son of Gehen
in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in
the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.**

He does not mention his name nor his fatherland. He only indicates the
name of his father, who was perhaps also either a prophet or a teacher,
because he has a name that comes from teaching. The names of the kings,
however, serve to indicate the time in which the prophet taught.

And Jeroboam was not only a blessed king, for he drove back the Syrians
and restored the old borders of the kingdom as far as Damascus, but he
also held the kingdom for a long time, for he reigned forty-one years.
Since at that time the kingdom of Israel was in its highest bloom, it
was almost ridiculous that the prophet should have

threatened desolation. But it goes like Solomon says \[Proverbs 16,
18.\]: \"He who is to perish becomes proud beforehand, and proud courage
comes before the fall.\" For since God does not immediately execute the
punishment, but continues to do good to the ungrateful, and waits, as
Isaiah says \[Cap. 5, 2\], whether His vine will bear fruit, the wicked
are gradually hardened and heap up wrath and punishment.

There is no doubt that the godless king Jeroboam attributed such great
successes to his worship of God, or rather, to speak more correctly, to
his idolatry. For this teaches quite obviously the history of the kings
\[2 Kings 14:24\], that he maintained the idolatrous worship, which
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, had established. Thus, in our time, the
Pabst\'s ungodly crowd ascribes the deep peace and other benefits of
earlier times to the worship services which

1080 mv. 174-17\". Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 1, 1-3. W. vi.
is78-is8i. 1081

He puts the present troubles of wars, turmoil and epidemics on the
Gospel.

But the history of 2 Kings 14 shows the true cause of the prosperity
under the godless king, namely that the people at that time had been
plagued by the Syrians in many ways, therefore God, according to His
mercy, had also shown Himself kind to the wicked. For so says the
Scripture \[2 Kings 14:26, 27\]: \"For the LORD saw the miserable
affliction of Israel, that even the shut up and the forsaken were gone,
and there was no helper in Israel. And the LORD had not spoken that he
would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven, and helped them by
Jeroboam.\" This is the true cause of good success, that God is kind
even to the wicked, and will not destroy unless He has first well
admonished them by the word. Therefore, the sinners deserved to perish,
but because the Lord had not yet proclaimed perdition through the Word,
He sent salvation to the afflicted, and to this success He added a
greater gift, namely faithful teachers who both exhorted to godliness
and condemned idolatry. But since the wicked did not respect this
blessing of the Word and misused the welfare against the Word and the
prophets, devastation finally followed.

Therefore, it is not in vain that history adds that the Lord has not yet
said that he will destroy Israel. If you look carefully at our time, you
will see a great resemblance to those times, which is why we rightly
fear a similar outcome.

**V. 2. 3. And when the LORD began to speak by Hosea, he said unto him,
Go and take a harlot wife and children of harlots: for the land runneth
after harlotry from the LORD. And he went and took Gomer the daughter of
Diblaim, which conceived, and bare him a son.**

This is a prophetic beginning, that in the beginning he draws on the
divine calling, and twice remembers the Lord that he has spoken.
However, this does not only serve to incite the prophet, so that he will
do the work with great courage.

The first commandment is given not only for the people of Israel to hear
the commanded ministry, but also for the admonition of the listeners, so
that they do not, thinking that they can justly despise the prophet,
despise God, who commanded that such things be proclaimed through the
prophet. Therefore, the first commandment is inculcated here, without
expressing it explicitly in words (tacite), that the people of Israel
should hear their God speaking. For since he is their God, he will not
be preached to them in vain, nor will he suffer his word to be despised
by his people without punishment.

The same way was followed by the apostles in the entrance of their
writings, publicly stating that they were appointed apostles and
servants of Jesus Christ.

Furthermore, almost all commentators are offended by the inconsistency
of the commandment that the prophet is ordered to take a prostitute
wife. Therefore, some only follow the secret interpretation, while
others believe that the prophet humbled himself and joined himself to a
prostitute in lawful marriage by command of the Lord. But those are most
inconsistent who think that the prophet himself committed fornication
with a whore, and make God the author and cause of this fornication, and
excuse it by comparing it to the theft or robbery in Egypt, when the
people of Israel, at the command of the Lord, took away the gold and
silver vessels borrowed from the Egyptians, thinking that fornication
could be excused in the same way as the Jews were excused when they took
away the gold and silver of the Egyptians.

But here is a very great difference. For not only the divine command
excuses the deed of the Jews, but also the reason or the natural right,
which orders that the workers are entitled to wages. Since the Jews had
been oppressed by long-lasting tyranny, they finally take the wages of
their work from the ungrateful Egyptians by God\'s command. Therefore,
this act was not theft, but the just reward due to the Israelites for
their long and hard service, which God, the highest and most just
sovereign and judge, bestowed upon them.

Here, however, no right can be given,

1082 n xxiv, I78-N8. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, is8i-is84.
1083

which would excuse fornication, because not only the divine laws, but
also the law of nature requires a lawful marriage, and it can never
happen that God should command or approve free fornication, or a union
between man and woman that is not lawful. For this is His unchangeable
will, that the union of a man and a woman be a lawful marriage, as it is
written \[Gen. 2:24\]: \"They shall be one flesh,\" that is, inseparably
joined. And again and again this saying is valid \[Hebr. 13, 4\]: \"God
will judge fornicators and adulterers.\" And this will of God is proven
by the daily punishments with which, as we see, fornicators and
adulterers are needlessly punished. For not only do certain diseases,
which are ordained for this sin, devastate the bodies, not only does
free fornication bring about the ruin of the household and the property,
but the hearts are also defiled. Therefore, how or for what purpose
should God force the prophet to fornicate? Although the people had to be
taught about idolatry, could they not be taught without the prophet
fornicating? Or shall we suppose that a teacher tainted by such an
offence shall have more credit for the direction of his office, and not
rather that he shall bring the office into contempt? For truly, he who
teaches rightly and lives shamefully (as Gregory of Nazianzus said so
well) gives with one hand what he takes away with the other.

What then is the opinion of the prophet? For the words are clear: \"The
prophet went and took Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim, who conceived, and
bore him a son.\" I answer that the prophet gave birth is obviously
inconsistent, and is not only against nature, but also against the
commandment of God. But that he took a harlot as a wife is also
inconsistent, for because a shameful act is thereby committed (for
marriage should be honest, especially that of the teachers in the
church), we rightly reject this opinion.

Therefore, it only remains that we firmly believe that the prophet has
put this woman in

The Prophet said that he had married in a lawful marriage, not some
dirty whore, but the daughter of an honorable citizen, who was raised in
an honorable way, which is also indicated by the name of the father,
which is added here. For what some say, here not a history is told, and
it also did not happen so, but was shown to the prophet only in a
vision, that cannot exist. For if this were allowed, it would be a
reason to destroy other similar prophetic examples, many of which, as it
is written, happened to be signs and testimonies of the prophetic
sermons that were publicly presented to the people. Thus it is written
of Isaiah, Cap. 20, 2, 1) that he went about naked and barefoot, that he
might be a sign and wonder over Egypt; and of Jeremiah, who for a time
wore a yoke about his neck, and chains, Cap. 27, 2. \[28, 13.\] 2)
Similarly, Ezekiel \[Cap. 24, 16.\] is foretold that his wife will die
on the same day, and he is forbidden to mourn. And since he proclaimed
this and also showed it to the people by the fulfillment, the people
asked what this meant. But how should the people be moved, or recognize
that something was shown to them by God through Hosea, if this was only
shown to him in a vision, but not done and brought to the people by the
deed itself?

Why then is it said, when the prophet is commanded to take a wife and
beget children with her, that he takes a harlot\'s wife? and what is
more strange, that he begets harlot\'s children? since they were
certainly not illegitimate, although his wife would have been a
harlot\'s wife before marriage.

It is a strange thing. The prophet is especially called to accuse the
idolatry of the people and to preach of the punishments that will
follow, namely, the destruction and rejection of the people and the
whole worldly regime, and because it is nevertheless necessary,
according to the divine promises, that a church be preserved, he adds
the consolation that is given to the godly

1\) In the issues: eax. 15.

2\) In the issues: oax. 26.

1084 u. xxiv. 178-iso. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 1, 2. 3. W.
vi. is84-is88. 1085

The first thing that is necessary is the preservation of some remnants
and the calling of the Gentiles. Therefore, in order to seriously
testify that he accuses the people of idolatry out of God\'s commandment
and preaches that punishment will surely follow, he shows this to the
people by this gesture and sign, as it were. He is commanded to call the
wife he has taken and the children born to him by this shameful name, so
to speak, that he himself calls them a whore-wife and whore-children,
and testifies that they are so called by God, namely, so that he may
indicate that all the people are so constituted before God, They were
guilty of idolatry and would suffer punishment for it, or guilty of
failing in the word, faith and right service of this God, who had
revealed Himself to this people through given promises and had called
them through special testimonies and miracles and set them apart from
the other peoples.

It is common in the writings of the prophets to call this fornication,
when one falls away from the faith in the given word and the service
commanded by God, and follows the teaching and the service according to
human counsel and human choice.

Therefore, in the word fornication there is also a figurative speech,
and the prophet\'s action is, as it were, a gesture or painting, which
indicates that idolatry is accused, as if he wanted to say: I have taken
a wife and begotten children with her by divine command, but what a
wife, what children! What do I have but a harlot wife and harlot
children? How does this happen? Because this whole nation is so
constituted, as he says here, adding in plain words the interpretation:
\"For the land runneth after fornication from the LORD.\" Therefore I am
compelled to call them by this opprobrious name, \"A wife of
fornication, and children of fornication.\" Likewise, the names attached
to the children also indicate punishments, namely, LoRyhamo and LoAmmi,
\"who does not obtain mercy\" and \"not my people.\"

That this is the opinion of this whole passage is sufficiently indicated
(as I have said) by the following, when he says that the land has
forsaken the Lord and committed fornication, that is, it has gone to
foreign gods and to God.

services followed. For this must be understood of idolatrous services.
Just as the godless priesthood does not deny the name of Christ and His
merit, baptism, the Lord\'s Supper and other things in words, but denies
them in deeds, because, apart from the merit of Christ and the
forgiveness of sins, it has established its own merits in vain by grace,
so the godless idolaters in the kingdom of Israel wanted to be taken for
the right worshippers of the true God, by whom they had been led out of
Egypt. But because they deviated from the worship that God had
commanded, although they said with their mouths that they honored the
God of Israel, they were true idolaters, and it was rightly said of them
that they had departed from God as a fornicating woman departs from her
husband, for they did not worship God, but the imagination and delusion
of their hearts, which they had formed for themselves without the word
of God from God.

However, God is only truly worshipped when He is worshipped according to
His word, that is, when the hearts worship and fear God, and then also
trust in God\'s goodness. These are the most noble and inward services;
they must be followed by the outward services, not as we invent them (as
the papacy invented the masses, the vows, the intercessions of the
saints, the merits of the saints to be distributed in the church, the
fasts, and therefore cannot escape the accusation of idolatry), but as
God\'s word or the second tablet prescribes them.

Therefore, the Jews who obeyed the commandment of God concerning the
temple at Jerusalem, and sacrificed in Dan, Bethel, Gilgal, on the
mountain of Samaria and in the groves, were hateful idolaters, even
though they considered themselves to be worshipping the right God. For,
not to speak of the ungodly heart, this worship was also unjust in
respect of place and person; for it was commanded to sacrifice in the
kingdom of Judah, and the priesthood was administered by the tribe of
Levi according to God\'s commandments. But Jeroboam sacrificed against
the commandment of God in the kingdom of Israel, and let without
distinction

[1086 XXIV, 180-182. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. is88-is9i.
1087]{.underline}

He also sold for money the office that was assigned by God to a certain
gender, just as the popes sell the bishoprics and other ecclesiastical
offices today.

Not only did the other kings of Israel follow this change of worship,
but Ahab added a pagan worship of the idol Baal on the mountain of
Samaria. For there is no doubt that Baal was Belus, who was worshipped
by the pagans, as the histories of the pagans also testify. Therefore,
this departure from God is rightly considered to be idolatry, since
these idolatries were in conflict with the commandment of God and were
nothing but disobedience. But God, as Samuel \[1 Sam. 15, 22\]
proclaims, prefers obedience to sacrifice, and hates rebellion no less
than sorcery, by which one not only departs from God, but through it men
also ask something of Satan, seeking his work and his help.

I have said about the commandment given to Hosea, now it must be
explained what is repeated in almost every single part of the prophecy
and is often used by Moses as well as by other prophets, namely why the
scripture compares idolatry with fornication or adultery. But it is an
exceedingly apt simile, when all the circumstances are carefully
considered. For just as a husband unites with his spouse, so God has at
all times united with His Church. For immediately after the first
parents fell, God promised salvation through the seed of the wife.

He not only repeated this promise, but also confirmed it with many
outward signs. Abraham was promised a manifest blessing, and the sign of
circumcision was added so that the chosen people and the designated
heirs of the promise would also be assured of the blessing. Moses also
instructed the people, who had been circumcised, from God\'s command
about the outward worship, and the Lord added a manifest covenant that
he would be the God of this people.

if they kept the commandments. But if they deviated from his
commandments, he would still have his promises, even though he would
associate himself with another people. Such promises are nothing else
than, as Christ says in the Gospel, a friendly invitation to a wedding,
where the guests themselves or the church are the bride, and the
bridegroom gives her everything he has. For the guests are invited in
such a way that it is announced that everything is ready \[Matth. 22,
4\].

The prophets refer to these promises when they call idolatry
fornication, for they indicate that God has joined Himself to His people
as a husband, as it were, and has adorned them in many ways, but the
people have forgotten these benefits and, like a bride, have departed
from her bridegroom and have joined themselves to others.

In this way the prophet Ezekiel Cap. 16, 3. 4. preaches about the people
of the Old Testament, because he says that they originated from the
Gentiles, were born like a girl whose navel was not cut, who was not
washed clean with water, who was not rubbed with salt, who was not
wrapped in swaddling clothes. For such was the origin of this people, as
Joshua \[Cap. 24, 2\] and Stephen \[Apost. 7, 2\] also testify, that the
Lord out of pure mercy took Abraham from the midst of the Gentiles and
prepared a servant for Himself out of an idolater. For when he had
compassion on the human race, he plucked it, as it were, as a branch
from the tree of the whole human race, in order to plant the people from
it, as it were, as a garden. This was, as it were, the first age of the
people of the Old Testament.

But when the people had begun to multiply and had become, as it were, a
manly girl, then, says the Lord \[Ezek. 16:7 ff\], \"you were still
naked and circumcised. And that was the time when you could be wooed.
Therefore I first spread my robe over you and covered your shame. For
when the people of Egypt had grown up, and were already almost entangled
in the idolatry of the heathen, only then did the Lord show his mercy to
them.

[1088 **L. XXIV, 182-I8S.** Interpretation of Hosea (3:), Cap. 1, 2. 3.
**W. VI, IS9I-IS93.** 1089]{.underline}

And after he came to this people through Moses, as to a bride, he made a
covenant with them. Here you see that everything was done as by a
bridegroom with his bride. But after the people had forgotten this
covenant and joined themselves to other gods, can this not be called
fornication and adultery with truth and rightly?

But only then was this covenant completed in truth, when the Son of God
became man, for then he joined himself as a bridegroom to the bride, and
washed us, who, as the prophet says \[Ezek. 16, 6.\], lay in the blood
of original sin, with the bath or water of baptism, by which we are
baptized into the death of the Son of God. For this is the right
cleansing from the blood. Then he anoints with oil, that is, he gives
the Holy Spirit through baptism, he clothes with embroidered garments,
stirring the hearts in various ways to obey the law of God.

Therefore, Paul also uses this very simile when he says in Eph. 5:29
that Christ nurtures and cares for his church as a member of his body,
flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone. Although these benefits were
only shown through Christ, they were also promised to the people of the
Old Testament, and those who accepted this promise in faith were saved.

That now also the people of the Old Testament fall away from the so kind
God, and that we today forget the benefits of Christ, neglect the Word
and the services ordered and commanded by Him, and follow what is
neither indicated nor commanded by the Word, but goes against the Word:
how can this sin be described more poperly than by this likeness of
fornication or adultery? For in this one offense is included all that
God declares His immeasurable mercy against us, who are unworthy and in
truth roll in our blood, that we are ungrateful to this so gracious God,
that this is the utter wickedness of departing from such a gracious,
kind and benevolent husband, with whom we are kn of the highest honor,
but who is not worthy of us.

and associate ourselves with those who abuse our goods and our souls
only for shame, for here one sees not only infidelity but also the
utmost nonsense.

Finally, this parable presents the righteous zeal of God, who cannot
suffer this contempt, as it is impossible that a husband, who loves
respectability, could suffer dishonorable love affairs with the
equanimity of his wife, as Ezekiel indeed treats this subject in
excellent fashion. This is what is peculiar to this simile, and indeed,
if all the circumstances are carefully considered, they perfectly
illustrate the hideousness of idolatry.

But apart from this, this likeness also depicts the rage by which the
idolaters are carried away. For just as a lewd woman dreams of nothing
else, even when she is awake, but of adultery with the adulterer, and is
completely ready for every kind of poison mixing and murder, so the
idolaters are inflamed with a tremendous hatred against true religion
and drive and protect idolatry with the highest zeal. zeal. They do not
spare the servants of God, not the parents, not the authorities, not the
children. Whoever opposes them, they persecute with inhuman force and do
not rest until they have eliminated him, as the hatred of the Pharisees
against Christ and the apostles, and the hatred of the papists against
our churches show. So, of course, the histories of the pagans and the
fables of the poets also remember many terrible parricides and the most
horrible acts of blood, which happened so that the adulterers could
enjoy their nonsensical courtship.

Therefore, this is an exceedingly suitable image by which idolatry is
compared to fornication. And because the thing has an obvious
shamefulness, it also serves to make people turn away from such a grave
sin. For if a monk were to realize that when he becomes an early Ciscan
or Dominican, and seeks to attain righteousness through a peculiar state
and works, he would fall away from God, and after the manner of an
adulteress, break the covenant he made with God in baptism: do you think
that he would be able to do so?

[1090 L. XXIV, 185-187. . Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
ISS3-ISS7. 1091]{.underline}

would he not ask for mercy and reconnect with his God through true
repentance, but flee the monastery, masses, fasts, idolatrous prayers,
hypocritical clothing and other superstitious things as the most harmful
plague? In this way, he would consider that the intercessions of the
saints and the service of the saints, the impure celibate state, and all
the multitude of human statutes are an apostasy from God or an adultery.
Truly, not only by the sin itself, but also by the shamefulness of the
thing, he would be moved not to be so ungrateful and godless to his God.

Whoever, therefore, wants to portray the church of the Pope correctly,
should compare the conduct and the services of the papists entirely with
the shameful adultery, since they despise Christ, to whose death they
are baptized, and who offers righteousness by grace free of charge, and
follow the statutes of men and the presumption of their hearts, by which
they promise righteousness to themselves and to others. The Revelation
of John therefore rightly imitates the prophet and compares the
Antichrist to a harlot, calling him the great Babylonian harlot
\[Revelation 17\].

Nowadays the bishops are the patrons of this fornication and the so
shameful adultery. Their support and satellites are the godless
teachers, the dull-witted people like Cochläus, the shouters and
drunkards like Eck, the mangy people like Pighius, the hypocrites like
Witzel, and everything of the same ilk, who receive the bishops for the
sake of praising the godless services to the ignorant rabble and
inviting them to their shameful adulterous nature. But what punishments
will follow this impiety, the prophet now indicates.

**V. 4 And the LORD said unto him, Call him Jezreel, for it is yet a
little while, and I will visit the blood in Jezreel upon the house of
Jehu, and will make an end of the kingdom of the house of Israel.**

This is the second part of this first prophecy of the kingdom of Israel.
For that the prophet is commanded to take a wife, which he calls a
harlot\'s wife, that serves

to indicate the sin of this people, which, corrupted by idolatry, had
turned away from God and the right service of God. Now that a son is
born of her, the Lord commands that the child be given the name Jezreel.
This serves, as the prophet himself indicates, to designate the
punishment that the people had earned with their ungodly fornication.
But, you may ask, in what way?

The word Jezreel comes from the verb Sara, which means \"to sow\". But
because this people was arrogant mainly because it knew that it was
God\'s people and planted, as it were, as a vine by the Lord Himself,
and because of this it surely despised the threats of the prophets,
therefore God commands that this very name be attached to it, but in a
completely different way than it had been claimed by the people until
now. For it boasted of the name Jezreel, which comes from sowing, that
it was the people sown and planted by God, but the prophet calls it
Jezreel because God wanted to sow it among the Gentiles for the sin of
idolatry. For as the seed needs the earth in which it is to be
scattered, so he calls this people God\'s seed, because God wanted to
scatter it like a seed among the far-dwelling Gentiles.

This opinion is indicated by the prophet himself, since he adds that the
blood debts of the house of Jehu shall be visited and the kingdom of
Israel destroyed. But also this passage makes the various opinions of
the interpreters dark. For since history teaches that Jehu removed the
two kings of Judah and Israel from the way and then intervened with the
sword against the descendants of the godless king Ahab and against the
prophets of Baal, some think that the prophet is speaking of this shed
blood in this passage. Therefore, the difficulty immediately arises as
to why God at this point threatens the descendants of Jehu with
punishment because of the shed blood, since God approved of Jehu\'s deed
and therefore promised him the kingdom of Israel up to the fourth
generation, as a reward for a well-directed cause; and truly, it is not
at all easy to understand this.

1092 6- xxiv, I87-I8S. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 1, 4. 5. W.
vi. iss7-isoo. 1093

to bring them into harmony with each other. For God is not so fickle
that He should disapprove again what He once approved.

Therefore, let us hold that Jehu did not sin when he acted on the
command of God against the ungodly kings and their descendants, and then
also against the priests of Baal. For when he did this, he was not a
private person, for he had previously been both anointed king by the
prophet and confirmed by the people. In addition, not only was the
commandment of the Lord through the prophet that he should do this, but
the Lord also approves of the deed. For thus saith he \[2 Kings 10:30\],
Because thou hast been willing to do that which is right in mine eyes,
and hast done in the house of Ahab all that was in mine heart, thy
children shall sit upon thy throne Israel unto the fourth generation.\"

What is therefore the sin of Jehu, or what are these blood debts, of
which the Lord says that he will impose them on the house of Jehu?
Certainly nothing else than what the history of the kings immediately
adds, in that it says so \[2 Kings 10:31\]: \"But yet Jehu kept not that
he walked in the law of the LORD God of Israel with all his heart; for
he left not the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel sin.\" Therefore, as
the prophet above called idolatry a fornication, so here he calls it
init a new name Damim, \"blood debt.\" And one must not look far for the
cause of this designation, for idolatry is always connected with murder
and bloodshed. Because the godly teachers cannot turn a blind eye to the
ungodly services, but must, according to God\'s command, condemn them
and bring the people back to the right doctrine, whereas the ungodly can
suffer nothing less than a reproach of their services, therefore they
arm themselves with power and goods, and immediately take up arms and
persecute the right teachers. And the sacrifice of children was also
common in those days, as the histories show. Therefore, also for this
reason, idolatry is called \"blood\" or \"blood debt\".

But moreover, it is common among the prophets to call sins blood debts
in general. Thus David asks in the

my prayers \[Ps. 51, 16.\] for the sins, that he might be saved
Middamim, from the blood debt. And although Ezekiel alludes to the birth
of man in the passage \[Cap. 16, 6.\] we quoted above, when he says: \"I
saw you lying in your blood,\" he thereby indicates the original sin
that makes us guilty before God and is the source from which all the
rest of the disobedience flows. The correct opinion of this passage is
therefore that just as God did not tolerate the idolatry of the earlier
kings unpunished, so He would punish the same against the house of Jehu
in Jezreel, that is, against Samaria or the kingdom of Israel.

But what kind of visitation or punishment it will be, the following
interprets: \"I will put an end to the kingdom of the house of Israel\".
For Zechariah, the last king of the descendants of Jehu and the son of
this Jeroboam, under whom the prophet taught, was killed in a riot by
Shallum after he had reigned six months, who himself was also punished
for this unjust murder. For in the first month of his reign he was
killed by Menahem. Therefore, while the empire was troubled by internal
rebellion, an enemy also came from without, the Assyrian, who made
himself tributary to the king of Israel. Pekahiah reigned after Menahem.
When he had been king for two years, he was killed by Pekah. Under him,
Thiglath Pileffer devastated Israel and led a good part of the people
captive. But under Hosea, who was the last king, Salmanasser took the
whole kingdom and put an end to it. All this happened about forty years
after the death of Jeroboam. Only then did Israel become a Jezreel, as
the prophet prophesies in this passage, for it was rejected by the Lord,
who visited the idolatry of so many nations, and was scattered among the
Gentiles.

**\[At that time I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of
Jezreel.\] 1)**

It is a common way of speaking: \"the bow of Israel\", that is, the
power of Israel and.

1\) Inserted by us.

1094 L. XXIV, 189-191. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 16V0-1E.
1095

warlike strength, because it was a very powerful empire. But the fact
that he says: \"in the valley of Jezreel\" - although a great defeat may
have taken place there, or Zechariah may have been killed - does not
prevent us from taking it for the whole kingdom of Israel, because
Jezreel was the capital of Samaria, and there was the king\'s house, as
the history of Ahab shows.

**V. 6 And she conceived again, and bare a daughter. And he said unto
him, Call her LoRyhamo: for I will have no more mercy upon the house of
Israel, but I will put her away.**

This piece also belongs to the prophecy of the punishment of idolatry.
For immediately after idolatry had begun in the kingdom of Israel
through Jeroboam, God in many ways exhorted the people through His
scourges, the Syrians, the Assyrians and other peoples neighboring the
kingdom of Israel, to return to the right way and join the God whose
worship was in Jerusalem. But because God is long-suffering, patient and
of great goodness, He heard the cries and the pleas of the afflicted
people, as we see in the history of Jehoash. There it is said \[2 Kings
13:23\], \"The LORD had mercy on them, and turned to them for his
covenant\'s sake.\" Likewise in the history of Jeroboam \[Cap. 14, 26\]:
\"The Lord saw the wretched affliction of Israel\" 2c.

Although he therefore afflicted them for sin, he sometimes gave happy
princes who \"drove back the enemy\" and healed those wounds of the
temporal regime. Such examples undoubtedly revived the people\'s hopes
to some extent, since the kingdom was so variously plagued by turmoil
and other calamities after the descendants of Jehu.

But the prophet threatens something new here, because he says that his
daughter received the name LoRyhamo. Because he indicates with it that
henceforth no such changes would occur as they had taken place, but the
people would remain, after it once among the heathen will be scattered,
without mercy in this misfortune.

The name is formed from Ryham he has mercy, with the negation word Lo;
but it means: who does not obtain mercy, \"who is in disgrace\". For
what the Latin text sin the Vulgate\] has: oblivione obliviscar ejus
himself wants to forget her completely\], the Hebrew has the verbum nasa
suA\], which means to annul. Therefore it is more properly translated by
the word \"to cast away,\" and this fits the scattering of the seed of
which he said above. For when we want to throw something away, we lift
it up. But because he \[the Hebrew text\] repeats the verbum: I will
cast away with casting away, therefore we have added the little word
\"wholly,\" that the vehemence that is in the Hebrew may be somewhat
expressed.

This is a truly terrifying prophecy of the house of Israel, if you put
yourself into the matter in your mind as if it were present. For
although it is not uncommon for kingdoms to be destroyed and communities
to perish, the downfall of this people is all the more severe and
terrifying because it was the people of God to whom the promises were
made in Abraham, not only about multiplication and physical well-being,
but, what is greater, about the woman\'s seed that would bless all
generations on earth. This people, which sprang from the fathers,
endowed with promises, redeemed from Egypt, transferred to the land of
Canaan, adorned with God\'s word and service, has so rejected God that
it seems as if He loves all other peoples more and takes more care of
them, who without God and without the word had sunk into idolatry and
godlessness. For what other kingdom is so destroyed that at least some
traces of it do not remain? But this people is so cast out of its land
that not even the name remains.

What is the cause of this great wrath? None other than that the kingdom
of Israel has departed from the word and service of God and followed
idolatry, or the services that were not ordered by the word of the Lord.
For this is the sin that God cannot tolerate, but avenges with the
utmost destruction, as the truly terrifying verdict is written here: \"I
will not

10962- xxiv, isi-i93. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 1, 6. 7. W. vi,
1603-16W. 1097

have more mercy on the house of Israel.\" For if the mercy of God is
taken away, dear one, what else is left for the wretched but to perish
in misfortune without any hope of help?

This threat also applies to our times, in which the light of the Word
has been restored to the German land through God\'s benevolence, and it
is clear which are the right and which are the wrong services, what
agrees with the word of Christ and what does not agree with it; but in
this great light we see what the pope, what the bishops, the sworn
slaves of the pope, are doing. For they keep the old idolatry, defend
it, force their subordinates to the same, blaspheme and condemn the
right doctrine, exercise against us, wherever they can, the utmost
cruelty, which we desire that the churches be advised and Christ\'s
honor remain unharmed. That is why that unfortunate LoRyhamo was born in
our time. For it is certain, although we do not know the time when it
will happen, that God will visit Germany because of this sin of
idolatry, as we have examples of it before our eyes in the churches in
Egypt, Syria, Asia, Greece and almost all of Hungary, which the Turk has
disturbed.

Therefore, it should be the concern of godly princes that the churches
are purified again, the abuses are stopped and proper services are
established, if they wish otherwise, that the enemy stays away and the
fatherland is well preserved. For if they continue to act cruelly
against the churches that have the word and to protect the papal
idolatry, the Lord will punish their blood debts like those of Jehu, in
whom a frightening example is presented to the authorities. For since he
did not prevent idolatry, but by his example also invited the subjects
to ungodliness, the sin of the people is imputed to him alone; of him
alone is it said that he sinned with his household. For the sins of the
people, which the authorities could have prevented, are imputed to the
authorities. And for this sin of their father the children also must
atone according to the fourth member, according to the saying of the
first commandment.

But how few kings the whole world has, how few princes Germany, who
seriously think of their descendants. Therefore, as the house of Israel
under the blessed king Jeroboam despised these threats, so do our
princes despise them. But the anger of the Lord will not sleep, but will
soon burn, and the sinners will suddenly perish, as the second Psalm
also threatens the kings and nations who do not kiss the Son, that is,
do not want to accept His word and follow it.

**V. 7 But I will have mercy on the house of Judah, and will help them
by the LORD their God; but I will not help them by bow, sword, battle,
horse, or horseman.**

Here the prophet concludes the prophecy of the kingdom of Israel, and it
is a terrifying and powerful example, which all descendants should often
contemplate, so that they learn to flee idolatry and to pay more careful
attention to the word. But because the enemy should also proceed against
the kingdom of Judah, he appends a prophecy that it should not be
preserved by human but by heavenly help, as also history shows, which
explains this passage of the prophet quite beautifully. For I do not
approve of the opinion of those who draw this passage to the return from
Babylon. Isaiah shows in the tenth chapter \[v. 28. ff.\] according to
the order, which oerter the enemy had devastated after the capture of
the kingdom of Israel. But the cause of this disaster was also the
idolatry of Ahaz, who had let his son go through the fire, as the
Scripture says, and had introduced the service of the gods at Damascus
in his kingdom, to which he was tempted by the success of the enemies;
just as if today a godless king would fall away to the godless nature of
the Turks, because he was tempted by their luck.

When God visited the idolatry of the house of Israel, Judah also felt
the misfortune of its neighbor and suffered the punishment of such great
wickedness, and only Jerusalem remained, which the enemy even besieged.
But suddenly the siege was lifted with a very great defeat.

1098 L- xxiv. 193-iss. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vr. isos-iE
1099

The angel of the Lord killed one hundred and eighty-five thousand men in
one night. Therefore Sanherib retreated, moved, not by his danger, but
by the defeat of his own, and fled to Assyria, where, as Isaias \[Cap.
37, 38.\] reports, he was killed by his sons. And the kingdom of the
Assyrians came to an end and was transferred to the Babylonians on this
occasion. The prophet preaches here about this deliverance, since he
says that the help will come through the Lord, not through the sword.

But as we have indicated above the causes of the desolation of both
kingdoms, so it will be useful here also that we note what had been the
cause of the preservation of the kingdom of Judah. The sins of Ahaz had
been the cause of the desolation of the kingdom of Judah. But his godly
son Ezekiah or Hezekiah, who by the grace of God had been given Isaiah
as a teacher and courtier, was highly devoted to the right worship of
God. Therefore, he also burned the bronze serpent after the Jews had
misused it for idolatry, and established proper worship in the church,
as history shows. Then, in the danger, when the enemy had already
approached the city of Jerusalem, he did not take refuge in human help,
but prayed in the temple and also exhorted his teacher Isaiah to pray.

If we had such military leaders today, don\'t you think we would be
happier fighting with the Turks? But now, when the true religion is
despised and the idolatry of the pope is maintained, or the hearts are
corrupted by greed and avarice, what is it to be wondered at if we not
only do not win, but are daily more and more pressed by the enemy?
Therefore, this history would be worthy of being engraved, as it were,
with a chisel in the hearts of all princes. For truly, God glorifies
those who glorify Him, while those who set aside God\'s honor, that is,
who favor idolatrous worship, are disgraced.

It is this history of which the prophet prophesies that Judah shall be
helped by the Lord, not by horses or horsemen.

But it can also be generally referred to the fact that reliance on the
carnal arm is condemned. For although God wants us to use the means He
has created, He does not want us to trust in them or rely on them, but
He wants us to ask and expect success from Him alone, as the Psalm also
reminds us \[Ps. 20:8 ff\]: \"They rely on chariots and horses and have
fallen down, but we remember the name of the Lord and stand upright.\"

But at this point we are rightly reminded of the difference that the
history and the prophet Isaiah say that this pod was done by the angel,
but the prophet says at this point that it was done BaJehovah, by GOD.
For it is here the divine name that is not attached to anyone as GOtt.
Therefore, both are secretly indicated here, both that through Christ
this salvation took place, and that Christ is God by nature. So also
Paul says \[1 Cor. 10, 4\] that Christ accompanied the Jews in the
wilderness. And the first promise \[Gen. 3:15\] prophesies that the seed
of the woman will crush the head of the serpent. For the defense of the
church, which has taken place continuously since the fall of Adam, did
not happen through the angels, but through the Son of God, whom the
Scriptures often call an angel, as Gen. 48, 16: \"The angel of the LORD,
who has delivered me from all evil.\" Isa. 63, 9: \"The angel that is
before him helped them.\" Mal. 3, 1: \"The angel of the covenant, whom
you desire.\" For although God uses the ministry of angels to defend the
church, it is Christ alone who breaks Satan\'s powers and crushes his
head.

And this is above all a lovely spectacle, to see that in so many dangers
from the beginning of the world the church had the Son of God as its
defender, who afterwards showed himself to men and suffered that he
might be overcome by the devil, who had been overcome so often, so that
the church might be delivered from the highest danger, that of eternal
death. But we hope that, just as Christ, before taking on human nature,
was not idle, but opposed the fury of Satan, so also

[IN L. XXIV, I96-IS8. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 1, 7-9. W. VI,
I6V9-I6I6. 1101]{.underline}

at this time, after he is in glory, will not forsake us, but will
suppress his enemy, Satan, who in so many ways persecutes the wretched
church.

**V. 8, 9: And when she had weaned LoRyharno, she conceived again, and
bare a son. And he said, Call his name LoAmmi: for ye are not my people,
neither will I be yours.**

That the Jews say that first a son was born to the prophet, then a
daughter, finally again a son, because the kingdom was at one time
firmer, at another less firm and in misfortune, I do not entirely
dislike, because it agrees with history, and the Scriptures often
compare that which is firmest with that which is male.

But let us see what the opinion is. He compares the kingdom of Israel,
which was already scattered among the Gentiles, to the weaned maiden, to
whom the mother no longer gives milk. For as the name shows, God had
rejected the ten tribes of Israel \"without mercy,\" that is, without
the promise of bodily restoration. Therefore, the following piece of the
third son goes to the house of Judah. And quite rightly Lyra interprets
it of the final rejection of the synagogue and of the desolation wrought
by the Romans. For because they would not accept the gospel, GOD

rejected them, not sparing even the temple and the worship. For he holds
the honor of his Son higher than those outward gifts of his people, he
holds his Son higher than the disobedient people.

But first of all, the magnitude of the punishment is to be seen with
diligence, and that God threatens: As they do not want to be my people,
so I do not want to be their God. For those who do not have God, dear
one, what do they have, if they also possess the whole world? But what
is the cause of such great wrath? The prophet will amply indicate it
below, and Christ says in clear words in the Gospel \[Luc. 19, 44.Christ
says in the Gospel with clear words \[Luc 19:44\] that the synagogue
must be destroyed because it did not recognize the time in which it is
afflicted, that is, because it did not want to accept the grace of God
offered in the Gospel through the Son of God, but kept Moses and
despised Christ, kept the Law and rejected the Gospel, kept its works
and rejected the grace of God, which the Son of God purchased for us
through His death.

Here, therefore, we are again reminded of how great a sin it is not to
accept the gospel. Who does not see by what fate Germany must finally
perish if the princes and bishops of Germany continue in this sin?

**The second chapter.**

This piece connects the old translation with the previous one, but
because the prophet here starts a new sermon about a new people and a
new kingdom, therefore we want to start a new chapter here. Although
this sudden departure from the intended subject does not seem to fit
well and also makes the prophets dark, nevertheless, if we look at the
matter more closely, the order of things itself forces the prophets to
make these transitions.

In the first sermon, Hosea indicates that.

both the kingdom of Israel was to be scattered among the Gentiles
because of idolatry, and the kingdom of Judah was to be devastated by
the Romans because of their contempt for the Gospel. Here the succession
of events forces the prophet to show what will happen after the kingdom
of Judah is destroyed and what kind of church God will have in the world
after the people who had the law and the service of God are rejected
because of their sin. Therefore, these prophecies belong to the church
of the

1102 D. XXIV, 198-200. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1616-1619. . 1103

New Testament to the article of the holy Christian faith, in which we
confess that we believe in a holy and universal church. For although
experience teaches that all the kingdoms of the world have, as it were,
their destiny by which they perish, yet God always leaves for Himself in
the world a people by whom He is recognized and praised.

Therefore, the prophets remind us of these two things: first, they
exhort us to the fear of God, since they indicate that the ancient
people were rejected because of sin, which were God\'s people and, as it
were, God\'s own, as John also calls it when he says: \"He came into his
own, and his own did not receive him.\"

On the other hand, they also teach about the unspeakable goodness of God
and exhort to faith. For just as God does not spare His people when they
depart from the Word and hold fast to idolatry, so He does not let the
sins of the Gentiles, who sin in ignorance and do not have the Word,
prevent Him from calling them to the knowledge of His name and to the
fellowship of the Kingdom of Christ. Kingdom of Christ. But there is no
doubt that if the churches in Germany continue to misuse the Gospel, God
will also reject them and choose another nation that is more grateful
for such great gifts. Therefore, let us not be sure, but fear God and
hold Him as a kind Father who accepts sinners. But now let us explain
the text.

Cap. i, 10. **But the number of the children of Israel shall be as the
sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered. And it shall
come to pass in the place where it was said unto them: Ye are not my
people, then shall it be said unto them, O ye children of the living
God.**

The first part of this prophecy presents a promise in general, so that
Israel, which has been rejected and scattered among the Gentiles, will
not despair of the kingdom of Christ, but will firmly hold that a new
life will grow out of this state, which is, as it were, a death, for God
will restore this fall of Israel. For this is the order of the works of
God: he

not that he might leave in death, but that he might call to repentance.
Thus he scattered Israel among the Gentiles, and rejected them without
all mercy, judging by the outward appearance of things, for the ten
tribes did not return to Canaan.

But how well God made up for this misfortune! For he has again gathered
those who were scattered among the Gentiles through the Gospel, and
gathered them in such a way that at the same time as the rest of the
kingdom of Israel, the fullness of the Gentiles came to the knowledge of
the kingdom of Christ. He reminds the people of Israel of this change,
so that they will not completely despair in this misfortune, just as we
also alleviate the present misfortune through the hope of the future
glory, which Christ has brought about for us through his death.

And for this reason the prophet did not want to say that Israel should
be increased, but with special diligence he imitates the words of the
promise made to Abraham. For thus says the Lord to him Gen. 13:16: \"If
a man can number the dust of the earth, he shall number thy seed also.\"
Who does not see that the prophet is looking at this promise, when he
says that the number of the children of Israel will be like the sand of
the sea, which it would be in vain to measure or count?

In this way he wants to comfort the afflicted people, so that they do
not lose hope in the future kingdom and do not doubt the promises made
to the fathers. For the ten tribes made believe that they would be
reduced to a small number when they were scattered among the Gentiles.
But, says the prophet, do not despair when you are thus scattered among
the nations; hope for the fulfillment of the promise made to Abraham,
not the physical promise of the land of Canaan, which was also great,
but the spiritual and eternal promise, in which not the possession of
the land of Canaan, but the forgiveness of sins and eternal life (which
is the true blessing) through the seed of Abraham is promised to all who
believe in this seed, that is, in Christ, the Son of God. For on this
opinion also Jeremiah Cap. 33, 22.

1104 **L. XXIV, 200-202.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 1, 10.
**w. VI. 1619-1622.** 1105

> He uses this promise from word to word where he prophesies about the
> kingdom of Christ.
>
> But the following indicates the figure of this infinite
> multiplication, or the manner. He says:

**And it shall come to pass in the place where it was said to them: You
are not my full, then it will be said to them, O you children of the
living God.**

> For although Israel was rejected because of its sin, the promise given
> to Abraham still belonged to it. Since your Israel, which was
> scattered among the Gentiles, was told by the apostles that this had
> been fulfilled, the Gentiles also received this message. And this is
> that glorious return and increase of the kingdom of Israel, of which
> the prophets everywhere prophesy.
>
> The ten tribes did not return to the land of Canaan, but through faith
> in the gospel of Christ they came to the promised seed of Abraham. And
> they were not multiplied by fleshly reproduction, but this is the
> right multiplication, that they have the Gentiles as comrades in the
> faith, who also came to the knowledge of Christ through the preaching
> that was due to the rejected Israel according to the promise, as also
> Christ says Matth. 11, 12\]: \"Those who do violence snatch the
> kingdom of heaven for themselves. For the Gentiles received the
> gospel, to whom no promise had been made. But because Christ was
> preached to Israel, which was scattered among the Gentiles, according
> to the promise, on this occasion the Gentiles hear the gospel and
> accept it.
>
> That this part is to be understood from the calling of the Gentiles,
> we have Paul in the letter to the Romans Cap. 9, 25. 26. as a witness.
> Therefore, we must take the verb \"to say\" from the public preaching
> by which the Gentiles, who are not God\'s people, are declared to be
> God\'s children after they accept the gospel in faith and believe in
> Christ.
>
> But it is known that wherever the calling of the Gentiles is spoken
> of, the abolition of legal worship and

1\) In the editions: Vsorasr.

the righteousness by grace, in vain, is understood. For what merits or
what services can we attribute to those to whom it is preached by the
word of God, \"You are not my people\"? If they are not God\'s people,
it follows that God is not their God either; thus they lack the
knowledge of God, the Word, good works and all the adornment of the true
church. This, therefore, is what Paul is fighting for, that we are
justified by grace, without the works of the law, through faith in
Christ. And today we rightly say that we are justified by faith alone.
For what do those who are not God\'s people bring to God other than that
they believe the word of the Gospel, firmly believing that they are
reconciled to God through Christ, that sins are forgiven and eternal
life restored? By this faith they become children of the living GOD from
among those who are not a people, as the prophet here speaks, whom John
seems to have imitated, since he says \[John 1:12\]: \"To those he gave
power to become children of GOD who believe in his name.\"

Especially the new way of speaking that he calls the Gentiles who
believe the gospel \"children of the living God\" has to be taken into
account. The change of speech, which the prophet also used above \[Cap.
1, 9.\], would have required him to say: Where it was said: You are not
my people, it will be said: You are the people of GOD. But to the
prophet this seemed too small to indicate the glory of the New
Testament. In order to explain Christ\'s good deeds more clearly, he
does not call them \"a people\", but \"children of the living God\". And
first of all, this designation includes a clear contrast, that before we
enter Christ\'s kingdom through faith, we are not children of God, but
of the devil. We are indeed created by God in His image, that is, holy
and righteous, and even immortal, but through sin, the author and cause
of which is the devil and our will, we are so deformed that we are no
longer children of God, since we have lost the image of God and have
taken on the image of the devil, who also in truth is not be-

1106 L. XXIV, 202-204. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1622-1624., 1107

has stood. But what followed this disobedience or sin is known. For the
natnr was created for life, but is now subject to death and all
misfortune. The mind, in which God\'s knowledge shone, is so blinded by
sin that it no longer recognizes God. The will is also corrupted to such
an extent that it desires precisely that which is contrary to God\'s
law. Therefore, there is an extraordinary disorder of all inclinations
and movements, for although they are not all sinful in themselves (for
the desire for food and drink, the love of spouses, children and
parents, and similar movements of the heart would also have existed in
the uninjured nature), 1) they are still not pure, for there is always
something sinful attached to them, which is contrary to the law of God.
Therefore, the saints are also subjected to various misfortunes in this
life, so that the remnants of sin are both punished and gradually
eradicated.

These damages all come from sin, by which the first parents from whom we
sprang ceased to be children of God and lost the image of God. Therefore
the Scripture accuses the whole of nature, as it does in the 14th Psalm,
v. 2. f., and calls it by an ignominious name, \"the children of men,\"
not God\'s children. \"The Lord looks down from heaven upon the children
of men, to see if any are wise, and ask after God. But they are all gone
astray, and are all unfit; there is none that doeth good, not one.\"
This statement contains the common judgment about the whole human race,
and no one is excluded, not the Jews, not their ancestors, the holy and
first fathers. We are all reproduced in the same way from the flesh
corrupted by sin, therefore we are all by nature not children of God but
children of men, that is, sinners who lack the glory they should have in
God, Rom. 3:23.

Here, therefore, Christ\'s benevolence is clearly depicted, since those
who are not God\'s people become children of the living God. For

1\) Only the Jena edition has closed the parenthetical here correctly,
the Wittenberg and the Erlangen already after aÜ6otu8.

This name indicates the destruction of the devil\'s kingdom, the
abolition of death, the forgiveness of sins and the bestowal of the Holy
Spirit, who infuses the hearts with the right knowledge of God and
awakens the minds to right obedience; finally also eternal life and the
inheritance of all goods that God possesses. For this reason he calls
them children, not only of God, but of the living God, to indicate that
this people, which was not God\'s people, but is adopted as children
through faith in Christ, will live forever. But life cannot exist where
sin is, \"for death is the wages of sin\" \[Rom. 6:23\].

And here the light of the New Testament must be applied, which not only
preaches mercy by grace, in vain, but also shows the cause of such great
mercy, namely Christ, who gave himself for our sins and saved us from
eternal death by his death. This mercy of Christ is indicated by the
gospel; those who believe in it are the children of God, as John says
\[Cap. 1, 12. f.\]; \"He gave them power to become the children of God,
to those who believe in his name, who were born, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.\" \"Blood\"
is what he calls fleshly procreation. Thus Cain is the son of Adam, but
for that reason he does not have the faith of Adam, and consequently for
that reason he is not a son of GOD. He calls the human choice or
adoption in place of a child \"the will of the flesh\", as Eve judged
Cain to make up for the damage received in paradise. Jacob thinks that
Esau will be the heir of the promise, but he is also mistaken. For this
does not happen according to our judgment. Thus the state of the
spiritual, as they are called, has a great name before the world, but
God does not call them good for that reason, because the world calls
them good, for he looks to faith. Thus the will of the flesh does not
make children of GOD. \"The will of a man\" is an imitation or a
pretending of men without the Holy Spirit, which does not make children
of God.

1108 **L. XXIV, 204-207.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 1, 10. 11.
W. **VI, 1624-1628**. 1109

The children of God are born of God, because the Holy Spirit through the
Gospel enkindles faith in the hearts, so that they firmly believe that
they are pleasing for the sake of Christ. Paul treats this benefit
wonderfully in his letter to the Romans Cap. 8, 17, where he says: \"If
we are children, then we are also heirs, namely heirs of God and
co-heirs of Christ.\" For here he shows the difference, that Christ is
God\'s child by nature, but we are adopted children through faith. For
through Christ we become children of God, therefore he says, \"joint
heirs with Christ.\"

But, you will say, God does not treat His children as children, for they
are oppressed with the cross, and Satan and the world rage against them.
Quite right. For this is also proper for children, so that the adopted
children may resemble the true child of God, who also suffered death and
calamity of every kind. In this, says Paul \[Rom. 8, 17.\], we are to
hold on to this hope, \"if we suffer differently, we shall also be
raised to glory.\" \[Rom. 8:24. \"For we are saved, but in hope.\" But
hope is not seen. Thus John says \[1 Ep. 3, 2\]: \"We are now the
children of God, and it has not yet appeared what we shall be. But we
know that when it shall appear, we shall be like it.\" This consolation
is very necessary, so that in our misfortune we do not let ourselves be
snatched away from this promise that we are God\'s children through
Christ. For a father chastens the son whom he loves 2c. \[Proverbs
3:12.\]

Cap. 1:11 **For the children of Judah and the children of Israel shall
come in multitude, and shall cleave one to another unto one head.**

It was a great misfortune among the people of God and the beginning of
all evil that the kingdom was divided after Solomon\'s death. For this
gave rise to idolatry, as history shows. For since Jeroboam was chosen
as king by the ten tribes that had fallen away from Solomon\'s son, he
established special services against the word of God in the kingdom of
Israel, so that his people would not go to Jerusalem every year to
worship.

and through this fellowship in the service of God did not again unite
with the king of Judah. Therefore, just as the kingdom or the temporal
government, the way of worship in the kingdom of Israel was different
from that in the kingdom of Judah. But what the outcome of these
counsels was, history shows. For idolatry was the foremost cause why the
kingdom of Israel was destroyed and the people carried away captive.

The prophet looks at this main part of the whole trouble and gives the
comfort that this separation from the kingdom of Judah will be
beautifully healed by Christ. For Judah and Israel would become of one
mind with united hearts and efforts in the same doctrine of the Gospel,
and would not have different heads, as happened after Solomon, but would
take hold of and kiss the One King, Christ. Therefore, nothing like what
happened before, when these kingdoms were separated, is to be feared.
Isaiah Cap. 11, 12. f. says the same thing almost with the same words:
\"He will raise up a band among the Gentiles, and will gather together
the exiles of Israel, and will bring the dispersed of Judah to the
house, so that Ephraim will not envy Judah, and Judah will not be
against Ephraim\" 2c.

But first of all the way of speaking is to be considered, that he says
\[Vulg.\], they will sit down one head. For there is no doubt that the
children of Judah and Israel, of whom he says here, are the true church,
or the people of the New Testament, which consists of the remnant of
Israel and Judah, then also of the Gentiles. But he says that this
church will have one head, Christ, as Micah interprets this passage of
Hosea, Cap. 2, 13. where he says: \"Their king will go before them, and
the Lord will be their head\", because this is the most correct
translation of what is written in the Hebrew: XXXXX XXXX. For there are
many examples that the prophets, who taught at the same time, also often
use the same words, especially when they speak of Christ\'s kingdom.

But Paul, who seems to have worked in the prophecies of the prophets of
Christ especially before others, has often used this very expression in
his letters, as Eph. 1, 22. f.: \"He has made Him the head of the church
over all, which is His body,

1110 L. XXIV, 207-20\". Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI.
1628-1631. 1111

namely, the fullness of him who fills all in all.\"

Here you recognize Hosea\'s way of speaking and at the same time hear
the reason why Christ is called the head, namely because he has the
church as his body, which he feeds, governs and adorns with his gifts.
But in this Paul differs from Hosea, that Hosea says of the church that
it will set itself as a head, but Paul says that this head is set or
given by God; but this agrees most beautifully with each other. For Paul
praises God\'s mercy here, through whose unspeakable goodness this head
was given to the church. But the prophet praises both the faith and the
confession of the church, which obeys the voice of God that sounds down
from heaven \[Matth. 17, 5.\]: \"Him you shall hear\", and acknowledges
Christ as its head, through whom it lives, is nourished, sustained and
governed. She holds on to this head with firm faith and does not allow
herself to be diverted from this head. For this steadfastness is
indicated by the prophet, when he says: \"And they shall set themselves
One Head.\"

And I have no doubt that the prophet saw that this plague would rage in
the time of the New Testament, that the Roman beast would present itself
to the whole world as the head of the church. Therefore, the constancy
of the true church is rightly praised, and this is listed among the most
distinguished gifts of the Holy Spirit, that it does not recognize
several heads, but sets itself One Head, Christ, whom it praises as the
one and true source of all gifts that are in the church. But what
dangers the church would have to endure, which recognizes only one head,
Christ, our times show sufficiently. Because we deny that the pope is
the head of the church, but praise Christ alone as our head, who alone
gives righteousness, forgiveness of sins, the Holy Spirit and eternal
life to his body, we are subjected to every kind of banishment and
torture.

Therefore, this is the one and foremost characteristic of the
Antichrist, that he takes Christ\'s name, that He is the head, and
boasts that He is the head of the church. But

What a miserable head! Indeed, a servant of Satan, since he persecutes
the true church with imprecations and the sword. But as the head is, so
is the rest of the body, for the cardinals, the bishops, the chasubles,
the monks, the nuns defile, besides the ungodliness which the doctrine
and the idolatrous services have, also an abominable disgracefulness of
life. And rightly so; for why do they not set themselves the true head,
through which they would be blessed with all spiritual blessings, as
Paul says Eph. 1, \... 4, and would be holy and blameless before God in
love? But these gifts provoke the true church to eagerly unite with this
head, and with great courage confess and praise this head against the
world and the gates of hell.

**And coming up out of the land, for the day of Jezreel will be a great
day.**

Where will they go out to? or from what land? The Jews expect to return
to the land of Canaan. But Hosea testifies against it, since he already
said before that this dispersion by the Assyrian will happen without all
mercy, that is, without hope of return. Therefore the going up, of which
he speaks here, is that the church, which through Christ is saved from
the kingdom of Satan, which was the kingdom of sin and death, 1) will go
up from this miserable life into a better and eternal one. An attentive
reader, I believe, will not doubt this view. For what else should the
church expect, after it has attained this headship, Christ, than that it
should be made a partaker of the promises which it hears in the Gospel
and which it believes?

But someone might want to ask questions because of the way of speaking.
Here we have Isaiah as an interpreter, who uses the same words in Cap.
11, 16, and concludes the sermon about the kingdom of Christ like this:
\"And there shall be a course for the remnant of his people, which are
left of the Assyrians, as it was unto Israel when they came forth out of
Egypt.

But it is common among the prophets that when they speak of the kingdom
of Christ,

1\) Instead of srit in the editions will read ernt.

1112 **L. XXIV. 209-211.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 1, 11.
2, 1. W. **VI. 1631-1634.** 1113

Compare this with the salvation from Egypt, as we have seen several
times in Micah. For there, after the hard and long-lasting servitude was
ended and Pharaoh was subdued by God, nothing remained but that they
obtained the promise of the land of Canaan. Therefore, as the Israelites
went up to it and took it after overcoming the enemies, so, says the
prophet, it will happen here 1). After many a struggle which the church
has to endure in this life, it will go up from the land of servitude to
the promised fatherland; the cause is: \"for the day of Jezreel is a
great day\".

But the prophet uses the name Jezreel in a different way than in the
first chapter \[v. 4. f.\], where the Lord called it Jezreel, because he
would scatter it among the Gentiles in his wrath. But here he calls it
Jezreel, because the Lord wants to plant them through the gospel, that
they may be a holy seed, as he called them a few days before \[Cap. 1,
10.\] children of the living God. Therefore, in the beginning Israel was
a seed of wrath, because the Lord, offended by their sins, had rejected
them. But here, in the New Testament, not only Israel, but the whole
Church is a seed of grace, for the Church is planted by God Himself
through the word of the Gospel, as also John \[Cap. 1, 12. f.\] says:
\"He gave power to become the children of God to those who believe in
His name, and are born of God.\"

\"The great day\" I refer not merely to the time of the Last Judgment,
when the Church will be delivered from all evils, but par excellence to
the whole period of the New Testament. For what will be revealed in the
life to come, the Church has through the Word and in hope also in this
life, as the prophet adds:

Cap. 2, 1. **Say to your brothers: They are my full, and to your sister:
She is in grace.**

Behold the exceedingly lovely change: he has named the church by the
former name of Jezreel, but in a very different sense.

1\) Erlanger: sl\" instead of: tüc.

2\) Erlanger: \"?anlo\" instead of: xaulo.

For the former sowing is done in anger and wrath, but this is done in
grace and mercy. In this way, the prophet now also changes the other
names, which God in His wrath commanded him to give to the children, so
that the church, which acknowledges Christ as its head, may firmly
believe that everything has now changed, that there is no longer any
wrath, but that the inexhaustible riches of God\'s mercy are now open.
For after he has given us his Son, how should he not give us everything
with him?

But as I also said above \[Cap. 1, 10J, that the verbum nrm, \"to say\",
refers to the public preaching ministry, so we must also state here that
the ministers of the gospel in the New Testament are commanded by God to
comfort the believers and to proclaim to them that they are the people
of God and in grace. For God will not accuse believers of sins, since
they have been justified by faith in Christ; He will not condemn them,
since Christ died for them, even rose from the dead, and sits at the
right hand of the Father, representing us. Since the apostle Rom. 8, 33
testifies that this is the case. Dear one, what else can be taught in
the church than what the prophet commands to be taught here, that such
people are God\'s people and have obtained mercy?

But, you will say, what need was there to repeat this, since he said
above: \"You are children of the living God\"? I answer: This would have
been sufficient, for, as we have said, it covers the whole range of
benefits and glory that have been bestowed on believers through Christ.
But we feel that this confidence often fades away, as Paul sufficiently
indicates in the very passage we have just quoted. For the church is
afflicted, affrighted, subjected to persecutions, hungers, suffers
nakedness, stands in danger, is killed. All this seems to happen to the
Church not as God\'s people or children, but as enemies and adversaries
of God.

Therefore, constant admonition is necessary here, so that she does not
lose heart and does not think that she has been abandoned or forsaken by
God.

1114 L. XXIV, 211-213. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1634-1637. 1115

The Church, however, does not believe that it is the people of God, that
it stands in grace, that it has a merciful and favorable God. Because
this is difficult to believe in the face of temptation, the Prophet, or
rather God through the Prophet, commands that this voice not be silent
in the Church: \"Ammi\", \"Ryhamo\", you are my people, I have had mercy
on you, I will not reject you, I will not impute your sins to you, I
will not leave you orphans, I will not let you perish in temptations, I
will not hand you over to death and the devil, because you are my people
and I have had mercy on you. For that ye are afflicted is for your good,
that sin may be purged out of you, that it may be put to death; that ye
may be heaped up with glory as valiant men of war; that faith may grow
in you; that ye may call upon me; that my name may be glorified in you;
that my power may be made mighty in your weakness; that I may conform
you to my Son, first in the cross, and then also in glory. Thus the
sermons of the prophets and the apostles agree most beautifully, all of
them aiming at the comfort and salvation of the church through Christ.

**V. 2. Speak the judgment of your mother, that she is not my wife, and
I will not have her.**

After the prophet has proclaimed in a glorious sermon that these
inexhaustible riches of God\'s mercy in the New Testament are to be
offered to all through the Word, he now turns to the remnants of the old
people and preaches about the synagogue, which, after rejecting Christ,
hoped to obtain forgiveness of sins and eternal life from the law. This
preaching of the sins of the synagogue and the punishments of the
synagogue is necessary, not only for the sake of those who should be
converted to Christ from among the Jews, but also for the sake of the
believers, so that they will not, moved by this anger of the godless
crowd, leave Christ and return to the synagogue and Moses.

Simeon prophesies in the Gospel \[Luc. 2, 34.\] that Christ is to many
in Israel a case and a

resurrection. For those who accept him and believe in him, he is for
their resurrection, for those who are freed from their sins by Christ
retain the hope of eternal life. But those who do not believe, to them
it is for a fall. But what this fall is, the present preaching of the
prophet will show, which is quite necessary to fortify the believers, so
that they do not resent this obduracy of the synagogue, but rather give
thanks to their Savior Christ, through whom they are freed from these
sins as well as from the punishments in which they see the synagogue
stubbornly continuing and corrupting.

In this way, the 45th Psalm, after preaching about the King Christ, and
the Church gloriously adorned by the Bridegroom Christ, adds a similar
exhortation \[v. 11. 1: \"Take heed, daughter, and incline thine ear,\"
that is, take heed to the word of the gospel, which keep, and be not
moved from the same; \"forget thy people and thy father\'s hand,\" that
is, beware lest thou join thyself to the synagogue, which rejecteth and
persecuteth the gospel, depart from it, and forget the carnal connection
which was among you before thou cameest to the knowledge of Christ. This
word of the prophet was followed by Paul, when he says in his letter to
the Philippians Cap. 3, 8. he says that he considers everything as dirt.
He considers everything as dirt in comparison with the exuberant
knowledge of Christ and his righteousness. And the prophet commands in
this passage that the remnant of believers from the Jews should have
such an attitude against the unbelieving synagogue, for he commands:
\"Speak judgment on your mother,\" judges them.

Although the Hebrew word XXX can be used both in a good and in an evil
sense *(μέσον* est), it has an exceedingly harsh meaning when taken in
an evil sense. For it comprehends both accusation and condemnation, just
as the prophet does both here: he accuses sin and threatens punishment.

But, you will say, where is the reverence for the parents here? For the
children are ordered to accuse and condemn the mother. And there are no
small condemnations

1116 **L. XXIV, 213-215.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 2, 2. W.
**VI, 1637-164.\"** 1117

The prophet remembers the adulteries here. He says, \"She is not my
wife, and I will not have her,\" that is, she is an adulteress. But it
is known what the prophet means by adultery. Shall one not honor the
parents by covering their sins? Why then does the prophet exhort the
church to punish the sin of her mother and rebuke her freely?

I answer: Honor is due to the parents, but in such a way that we do not,
while honoring the parents, do dishonor to God, for the commandment that
one should serve God is, according to the order, the earlier, and that
of the parents the later. But it serves the glory of God to punish sins,
and especially ungodly worship, by which dishonor is done to God.
Therefore, the church is right not to turn a blind eye to the adultery
of the mother, but to rebuke it freely. For even though this is a
disgrace to the mother, it must be called a blessed disgrace, because it
is connected with the salvation of the soul. For sin is punished so that
it may be corrected, and the synagogue is accused so that it may be
restored and not continue to disgrace God and not bring ruin upon
itself.

But this is the cause of the immense hatred and envy with which the
church is weighed down at all times. For the name of a mother is an
exalted name, and the good deeds of education are rightly praised by
parents, but rightly admired by children. Therefore, the synagogue
thought that it was right to complain about the unjust abandonment of
its children, whom it had raised and instructed as a mother in the old
service that God had instituted and commanded, and thought that the
right to teach was not claimed without grave injustice against it, by
the children against the mother, just as the pope nowadays also
oppresses us with the prestige he has in the church, and does not want
to be brought back to order by us, but accuses us of unjust abandonment,
but to himself he attaches this exceedingly brilliant title that the
prophet here gives to the synagogue, calling her a mother.

But the papal sycophants think,

that therein lies the palm of victory for them, when they raise the
prestige of the church to heaven with words, and praise the fetters of
the old church discipline to the simple-minded. Say, they say, if you
are the church, from where did you begin to be the church? Were you not
baptized into the pope\'s church? Why then do you now depart from it?
Why do you want to teach the Father as children? Yes, rather learn from
your father and be obedient to him, if you do not want to be ungrateful
children. These are words of the papists, which they think we can be
overwhelmed with. But if we look at the prophets, this was the reason
why the synagogue did not want to be taught by the apostles and wanted
their honor to be spared. But the prophet commands the opposite in this
passage, that the mother should be accused by the children, without
regard to the apparently special privilege that she is the mother.

Therefore, one must adhere to Peter\'s rule here \[Apost. 5, 29.\]:
\"One must obey God more than men.\" If the synagogue accepts Christ,
recognizing that through Him alone one receives forgiveness of sins and
eternal life, then the children will kiss them and shower them with
every kind of honor and service.

So also the popes and the bishops should refrain from persecuting and
blaspheming the gospel, they should provide the churches with right
teachers, abolish the godless and idolatrous services and restore pure
and right services, then they will not lack our service; we will
recognize them as our parents and gladly obey their reputation, which we
see fortified by the word of God. But because they persecute the gospel
and maintain idolatry, we must not hold the name of our parents in such
high esteem that we should therefore deny Christ and associate ourselves
with idolatry. Rather, we obey God, who commands that the Son be heard,
and not only separate ourselves from the idolaters, but also freely
reject their reputation and punish their idolatry, lest inexperienced
people, angered by their example, be drawn into error.

1118 L. XXIV, 215-218. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1640-1643. 1119

Therefore, we should be mindful that the Holy Spirit is commanded to
judge at this point. He says, \"Speak the judgment,\" that is, accuse
and condemn. Whom? Your mother. But one owes honor to one\'s parents.
That is true, but it is not due to this mother, who is not only a
shameful adulteress, but also wants to force the children born of her
into adultery. Therefore, let not the name of the mother hinder you;
condemn her and say, \"Let her not be my wife, and I will not have her.

This is indeed a terrible sentence of condemnation, if you consider it
carefully and compare it with the high opinion that the mother wants to
keep with the children, because the synagogue also wanted to protect
this title with fire and sword, that she was the people of God, whereas
the apostles condemned her as the most harmful corruption. But here the
children are commanded to condemn the mother and put her under ban,
because she is not only not God\'s wife, but a shameful adulteress of
Satan.

Thus the pope claims the name of the church for himself, but he condemns
us as heretics. The Holy Spirit does not want this blasphemy to be
overlooked at all, but wants us to freely declare that the pope with his
own is the church of Satan, since he opposes the gospel and executes a
different righteousness than that which exists through the Son of God.
Here the church of Satan is annoyed in two ways. First, she cannot stand
this judgment that is passed upon her; second, she does not want this
judgment to be passed by those whom she considers to be her mother.
Therefore, she stirs up strife and undertakes to avenge this insult in
many ways. But the true church cannot set aside the commandment of God,
therefore it is forced to proclaim against its mother this judgment of
adultery, that the worship of God, which it follows, is nothing but
abominable idolatry, which the prophet compares to adultery, for the
reasons stated above.

**V. 2. 3. Put away their fornication from their faces, and their
adultery from their breasts, lest I strip them, and**

**naked, as she was when she was born; and I will not make her like a
wilderness and like a dry land, lest I cause her to die of thirst.**

This is the other part of the judgment, in which he mentions not only
the sin, but also the punishments, which are truly terrifying, and so
coincide 1) with the outcome that we must also, we may like it or not,
acknowledge God\'s judgment on the unbelieving synagogue.

The little word XXXXX, \"from her face\", is very common in Hebrew, but
in this place it seems to be put for a certain reason, just as
afterwards also XXXX XXX, \"from her breasts\" is added. For it means to
abuse the eyes or the face and the breasts for adultery. Rightly,
however, we refer the eyes to the trust which is due to God, but which
is turned by the idolaters upon the creatures. Furthermore, the breasts
are given to women to nourish their children, hence they signify the
teaching or the word. But this belongs to the description of adultery
and fornication, of which the prophet says. For after one has departed
from God and has turned one\'s trust to the creatures (for this is what
I call the services which we invent for ourselves without the word of
God), it follows that the wicked also pervert the word, and thus turn
their breasts to adultery. But what punishment will finally follow?

The first is that the Lord threatens that he will strip her and present
her naked as she was when she was born. From this passage of Hosea seems
to have flowed the famous sermon of Ezekiel, Cap. 16, 3. 4.: \"Your
lineage and your birth is from the Cananite country, your father from
the Amorites, and your mother from the Hittites. Your birth was thus:
Thy navel, when thou wast born, was not cut: neither wast thou bathed
with water to make thee clean, nor rubbed with salt, nor swaddled in
swaddling clothes\" 2c.

For it is well known how the LORD has created the people who came from
the one Abraham.

1\) Instead of eonvtznimus in the editions, 6ONV6 \"iu \"t will be read;
after that we have translated.

[1120 **L. XXIV, 218-220.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 2, 2-5.
**W. VI, 1643-1646.** 1121]{.underline}

I have adorned you with the kingdom and the priesthood or the service of
God, who was called out of paganism and idolatry. This adornment, he
says, you will lose because of your idolatry. For I will humble you and
reject you, so that you will be like other peoples who have neither God
nor worship.

Secondly. I will make thee a desolation, stripped of all adornment; thou
shalt be as a desolate land, which cannot be inhabited. Here he
indicates that this people, having lost the service of God and the
kingdom, will then try in vain to rise again. So also Daniel Cap. 9, 26.
says: \"And a people of the prince shall come and destroy the city and
the sanctuary, and it shall come to an end as by a flood; and until the
end of the battle it shall remain desolate,\" that is, as this people
shall be oppressed by the Romans, so it shall remain, and it is
determined that it shall never arise again after that. Therefore they
have tried their luck in many ways, but in vain, because it is so with
them, as it is threatened twice in this place, that they shall remain
like a desolate and uninhabitable place.

The third is that he will also destroy this people by thirst. This
actually refers to spiritual blindness, that, as David \[Ps. 69:23.\]
says, their table becomes a rope before them. It is a hard thing for
this people to be so devastated that they cannot be restored in any way,
but it is far more difficult to be deprived even of all comfort in so
many calamities, as happened to the Jews. For they are eager not to
understand the prophecies of Christ, and spend all their effort on how
to obscure the true meaning of the Scriptures by their sophistry. This
is the thirst that Amos compares to hunger, not for bread, but for
words, just as in those who accept Christ and believe in him there is a
well of water that flows into eternal life \[John 4:14\]. Those who lack
this water must inevitably perish, as the example of the

Jews is before your eyes. But this is not the end, because he adds:

**V. 4. 5. And I will not have mercy on their children, for they are
harlot children. And their mother is a harlot, and she that bare them
keepeth herself shamefully.**

This is the fourth misfortune, that the punishment will also pass to the
descendants. For he calls the descendants whoremongers, since they
follow the ungodliness of the synagogue. This inherits with the sins
also the punishment, as we see before our eyes. The Jews want to be like
their ancestors, blaspheme Christ, and block all ways by which they can
be led to the knowledge of Christ. They believe their teachers more than
the Scriptures themselves; they not only shamefully avoid the
testimonies of the prophets about Christ, but reject them completely.
For you will not find a Jew who would follow the reputation of the
prophets. Therefore they remain in the same blindness, and they have to
bear the same punishments with their mother, because they remain in the
same sins.

**And saith, I will go after my servants, which shall give me bread, and
water, and wool, and flax, and oil, and drink.**

This sin of the synagogue is punished by the prophet not only once, as
the following shows, because the synagogue thought that this putting
aside of the gospel and Christ would serve them to keep the kingdom and
bodily advantages, as John Cap. 11, 47. f. indicates that in a public
discussion this was the main subject: if they left Jesus, it would
happen that all believed in him, and finally the Romans would come and
take away their land and people. But Christ makes this very clear in the
parable of the great supper, where the invited guests despise the
supper, because the care of the fields, the oxen and the wedding seemed
more important to them. But who should not be surprised at the extreme
blindness? They judge that idolatry and false doctrine will be blissful,
whereas if they accepted the true doctrine, they would have to fear that
they would die of hunger, like Jeroboam,

[1122 V. XXIV, 220-222. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1646-1649. 1123]{.underline}

the father of idolatry, hoped that he would be able to keep the kingdom
if he abandoned right worship and established new worship.

Even today, what other reason can we think of why the papists so
stubbornly hold on to the godless services than that they see them
connected with riches and dignities? For these they fear, if they should
accept the pure doctrine, as if God would not indeed give bread to His
church, or as if it were better to ask for it from the devil.

I have known a nobleman who, since he had an exceedingly rich income
from more than one prebend (canonicatu), was once admonished at the
table by a godly and learned man who was a friend of his that he should
in any case leave this state, in which it was not even safe to have the
right opinion of religion. Then he said, pointing with his finger at the
exceedingly delicious food and the wine, which was served with it of an
exceedingly splendid kind: \"This is what makes it so that I do not like
to leave this state. You see that, as the prophet says here of the
synagogue, so the canonicus regarded the food and the wine as rewards of
his idolatry, and therefore would not renounce it. And in fact, later
on, he got even more reward for his ungodly mind, because he also became
a bishop. He would never have attained this dignity if he had wanted to
punish the idolatry and godlessness of his state and unite with Christ
and accept the gospel.

What else can be said about these people than what Paul said in Phil. 3,
19. that the belly is their God? They look to it in their services;
everything that benefits or harms it, they do or avoid, taking no
account at all of the Word and of the Son of God, of whom they know that
God commanded that He should be heard. I am truly frightened with all my
heart when I see that the sins of the papists are so consistent with the
sins of the Israelite people. For who should not fear that the same
danger threatens Germany?

V. 6, 7: **Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and
will put a wall before it, that it shall not find its way; and when it
goeth after its lovers, it shall not take them, neither when it seeketh
them shall it find them.**

He repeats here the punishments, but with other images. For the closer
the wicked are to disaster, the more certain they are; it is not enough
that they have been admonished once, even threats repeated a thousand
times they still despise. But the prophet uses a very beautiful image.
The simile of the adulteress indicates the burning desire with which
Satan inflames the hearts of the idolaters, for indeed, no harlot burns
so with unchaste desire as those who have departed from the right
worship, with desire to increase and promote their idolatry.

Since they cannot be brought back to the right path in any way, for the
more fiercely you oppose them, the more fervently they insist on their
worship, God threatens to give them the way, that is, to force them
through an external enemy to desist from idolatry. Not Christ, not the
apostles could do anything with the Jews. But after the Romans had razed
the temple and the city to the ground, they were forced to abandon their
sacrifices and services, which they had stubbornly opposed to the
Gospel. For since the idolatrous cannot be deprived of their desire,
since they do not want to obey the word, their ability can be deprived
in such a way that even if they run, they cannot seize their prey, and
even if they search, they cannot find it.

The bishops also bring this punishment with all their might over
Germany, because they do not put an end to the ungodly masses, they do
nothing about the other idolatrous services. Even today, they continue
to offer countless superstitious things to their people, such as
consecrated water, salt 2c. They are admonished for this by the Word,
but in vain. What else can we expect but that the Turk or a

1124 **k- XXIV. 222-224.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 2, 6-8.
**W. VI. 1649-1652.** 1125

another cruel enemy come and turn everything around? This is the only
fence through which the path to superstition can be bequeathed to them.

The poor Hungarians had seven-year vows, which they paid to the idol of
Mary, which was worshipped at Aach 1). But is not the way bequeathed to
them now, since they, oppressed by the Turks, have lost life, goods and
everything? This is the reward of idolatry. But the world will not
believe this until it learns it. Therefore, those who, having been
reminded, do not want to repent, may only continue. But for us it
behooves us to be all the more diligent in the proper worship of God,
and to guard against all occasion of idolatry, lest we fall into the
same dangers.

**And have to say: I want to go back to my previous husband, because I
was better than I am now.**

This is a wonderful piece, because it shows that God, even when He
punishes sins, punishes with the intention of calling sinners to
repentance and bringing them back to the right path, as Paul also
preaches to the Corinthians 2) \[1 Ep. 11, 32.\]: \"When we are judged,
we are chastened by the Lord, so that we will not be condemned together
with the world.\" This saying must be inculcated in us all the more
diligently the further the judgment of reason departs from it. For after
it has been established that God punishes sin, reason believes that this
punishment is without all mercy, so it loses heart and despairs.

But hear the prophet here. The sin of the synagogue is truly grave and
terrifying, the punishment is also terrifying. But why does God impose
it? Certainly, so that it, reminded by the misfortune, returns to its
God and unites with Him again. Therefore, David rightly calls the cup of
the Lord a cup of salvation \[Ps. 116, 13\]. And it is not only a
healing cup for the saints, who are often undeservedly afflicted.

1\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: ayuag instead of: in the Jena. Also the old
translator offers: After.

2\) Jenaer: aoneisnatur; Wittenberger and Erlanger: eonllovatur.

but also to those who are chastised for their sins. \"For God does not
want the death of the sinner, but that he should repent and live\"
\[Ezek. 33:11\], so that, just as we have departed from God, so again we
may be united to God through true repentance and faith.

It is useful to inculcate this saying in the afflicted, so that,
although they cannot deny the sin of which the punishment reminds them,
they may nevertheless retain this comfort: God punishes, not in order to
condemn, but in order to call back to Himself, and as a kind father, to
seek the remedies, so that He would not be forced to exclude the
disobedient son from the inheritance.

Today, it looks terrible in poor Hungary. But God wanted Hungarians to
have godly teachers who would remind them that God was doing this, not
to reject them, but to remind them of the old idolatry and thus make
them renounce idolatry, ask for forgiveness of sins and expect salvation
from Christ.

Neighboring Austria sees what it has to expect as a consequence. But
would God that it would remember and believe that this is the reward for
the idolatry it has defended for so long, and for the innocent blood
that has been spilled everywhere, as people rage against those who
profess the pure doctrine of the Gospel and condemn the papal abuses.
Would that God, reminded by the present calamity, would teach it that
the \[false\] worship of God, which it has stubbornly held on to until
now, is the cause of these evils, and that it would accept the Word, and
order the churches well, and put away all useless and superstitious
worship! But as with the synagogue all this was in vain, so also now
there is the danger that we preach in vain to our adversaries.

**V. 8 For she will not know that I am he that giveth her corn, and
wine, and oil, and have given her much silver and gold, which they have
used in honor of Baal.**

The counsel of God is good and holy, but the ungodly flesh does not
obey, it does not reject the ungodly services, but ver-

1126 D. XXIV, 224-226. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I652-I6S8. 1127

increases them. It does not repent, but surely continues in sins, as
Isaiah also complains in the first chapter, v. 5: \"What shall I
continue to strike at you, since you only make the deviation more?\" But
let us also look at our times. The terrible and daily punishments that
come everywhere do not soften our adversaries. Therefore they do not
dismiss the cruelty with which they have proceeded against the church,
nor do they pay attention to the word, and with the greatest obstinacy
they retain and defend that which they know will be punished at their
services.

Therefore, the godly rightly look at God\'s long-suffering and take
comfort in it, since God is also kind to the wicked and does not only
shower them with goods, as the Lord says here that he gave grain, must
and oil to the idolatrous Jews and gave them much gold and silver, but
also, when he punishes the unthankful, the punishment is carried out
with the intention that they learn to recognize God and turn to God. But
as the flesh is blind, and does not see the counsel of God when He
punishes, so it does not perceive the source from which such a great
stream of benefits flows. For it attributes everything to idolatry and
idols, in the adornment and worship of which it is not only zealous but
also excessively wasteful, as the example of the papists shows.

The last part is extraordinarily short: they used it to or for Baal. But
there is no doubt that the prophet meant to say that the idolatrous Jews
misused gold and silver for the service of Baal, since they thought that
this \[namely the great benefits of God\] was the reward of their
worship.

But here a question arises: The histories show that the Baalsdienst had
begun at the time of the judges under Gideon and had stopped under
Josia. Therefore, when the prophet speaks of the synagogue being
destroyed by the Romans, how does he commemorate the Baal service, which
had long since ceased completely? The answer to this is: through the
name of Baal, the whole of

generally denotes any idolatry. For the word \"Baal\" not only denotes a
lord, but it is generally taken for a lover, as we use the word \"a
paramour\" in German when we denote a love that is not honorable. But it
is customary with this prophet to compare idolatry with fornication and
adultery. It is also in this place that the opinion is not inconsistent:
They make Baal of gold and silver, that by this is understood not merely
the image pillars of Baal adorned with gold and silver, but par
excellence, that the Jews have misused their money and goods to adorn
idolatry. Thus he will say afterwards \[v. 17.\], \"I will put away the
names of Baalim,\" that is, she will not honor idols, but will say \[v.
16.\], \"my husband.\" Therefore the name Baal comprehends in general
all idolatry, which is actually the shameful and nasty love, which is
transferred from the Creator to the creature.

But if someone does not want to accept this opinion, which has nothing
improper and agrees with the grammar, let him be satisfied in this way,
that he understands this passage as Matth. 23, 35, where Christ
threatens the Pharisees and the whole synagogue and says that the blood
of all those will come upon them who have been killed, from Abel to
Zacharias. Certainly, the Jews who lived at that time had not killed
Abel, and yet they suffer the punishment for his shed blood because they
associate with the godless Cain and persecute the godly teachers.

In this way, the idolatrous Jews, that is, the persecutors of the
gospel, although they did not serve Baal, nevertheless lived in the same
sin of idolatry, putting their trust in their worship and sacrifices and
rejecting Christ. Now, if this is applied in this way to the synagogue,
which in the time of Christ and the apostles condemned the gospel, it is
a great blasphemy to call the sacrifices and other legal services a Baal
service, that is, to claim that God detested the same as much as He
detested the service of the idol Baal. And yet it is in

1128 **U- XXIV. 226-228.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 2, 8. 9.
**W. VI, I655-I6S8.** 1129

In fact this is the case, since what does not come from faith is sin
\[Rom. 14, 23\], and he who does not have the Son of God does not have
eternal life, 1 John 5, 12.

**V. 9 Therefore I will take my grain and my must again in their season,
and I will take my wool and my flax, that they may cover their shame.**

This is finally the end to which godlessness leads, and God, who by His
nature is good, gentle and patient, and gladly forgives, forces Him to
be harder. For how can God remain kind to those who do not cease to
abuse God\'s goodness?

Grain, must, wool and flax, that is, daily bread, peace and everything
that this bodily life requires, God also gives to the wicked, so that
they may recognize Him and trust in His goodness and obey His voice.

But look at the example of the Jews. They misused these gifts to cover
their shame or godlessness, because they wanted to prove to others from
this prosperity how much God cares for them, while they were shameful
idolaters and prophet murderers. Thus, the papists also hold up to us
the merits of earlier times as a certain reason to prove that their
worship of God is not justified. They hold up the merits of earlier
times as a certain proof that their worship of God is right and pure.
But the present disadvantages, which are the punishments of past
idolatry and present ingratitude and contempt, they say, have arisen
from the teaching of our Gospel, which they condemn as harmful and seek
to make hateful to all. Therefore, the world truly suffers from
incurable ills, for it is not improved by the punishments, and it abuses
the benefits of God in a shameful way. Therefore, what else can God do
than to corrupt the wicked and finally deprive them of all their
welfare, so that they will be forced to refrain from sins even against
their will?

But we are to know that these are also the sins of private persons. The
rich man in Lucas \[Cap. 16, 19.\] is in the highest life, in good and
splendid circumstances, but he does not delight so much in the use of
his money.

of the present goods than that he thinks that they are the reward of his
righteousness; therefore he judges that he is a blessed man. On the
other hand, he despises the afflicted Lazarus as a man who is detestable
to God and who, through his sins, has forced God to inflict such severe
torment on him. Therefore, he surely continues in his hypocrisy and
completely forgets about the proper worship of God. For he does not
think that he must do this first of all, that he should first be
grateful to God for that bodily blessing, that is, that he should learn
to trust in the goodness of God and obey His word. Then, that he use the
goods, not only for his own pleasure, but to help the lack of others.
Therefore, as the prophet says here, he compels God to take away grain,
must, wool and flax in his anger and to present him naked, so that
others must see that he was neither dear nor pleasing to God.

But the prophet has used a particularly emphatic word, for it XXXXX does
not mean merely \"to steal away,\" but: I will make free, which Paul
seems to have imitated, since he says Rom. 8, 21. \"For the creature
also shall be made free from the service of corruptible things.\" For
everything that God has created is good and created for the use of man.
But this is as it were a captivity of the creatures, that they are
forced to serve the abuse of the ungodly. Thus they had abused the wool
and the flax to cover the shame or the ungodliness of their idolatry.

From this bondage, says the Lord, I will set free my wool and my flax,
that is, I will take away these gifts from ungodly men, so that they can
no longer abuse them to adorn their hypocrisy and idolatry. We will see
this liberation when the Lord takes away the kingdoms of the tyrants,
when he takes away the wealth of the miser, the power of the strong, and
other gifts. For because the wicked only want to abuse them, they are
rightly snatched away from them. Those who read the history of the
Jewish wars see how the Lord stole grain, must, wool and flax from the
synagogue.

1130 L. XXIV, 228-230. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1658-1660. 1131

**V. 10. Now I will expose their shame before the eyes of their lovers,
and no one shall deliver them from my hand.**

Only here the judgment is rightly taken from the outcome. For God also
allows the godly to be afflicted in this life, but the affliction has a
measure, and as Christ promises John 16:20, the sorrow of the godly will
be turned into joy. But when the Lord visits the wicked, who continue
safely in sins, they are so overwhelmed with misfortune that there is no
end to their misery. For why do they let the time that the Lord has
given them for repentance pass by without any fruit, and only go about
heaping wrath upon themselves?

But here the prophet retains the simile of the adulteress, because he
remembers the millers. However, it is not necessary to indicate who
these revengers are. For the prophet simply wants to say this, that it
will happen that this endless lamentation will reveal the stubborn
godlessness of this people to the whole world, and from the miraculous
downfall all will recognize that the worship, which the synagogue held
against the teachings of the gospel, was pure abomination before God.

The word Nebala0 contains both sin and the punishment of sin, the
becoming ashamed. Therefore it is indifferent whether one translates it
by foolishness or shame and disgrace, since the outcome makes the
idolaters ashamed, that they finally realize that they have relied on
futile help, since they are overwhelmed by incurable ills.

**V.11. And I will put an end to all their joys, feasts, new moons,
Sabbaths and all their holidays.**

After they are surrounded with every kind of misfortune, this evil is
also added, that the Lord condemns and rejects religion and worship. For
when the Sabbaths, when the new moons, when the other

1\) In Hebrew, the word shame is used here, which is identified with
foolishness and the punishment of foolishness.

certain feasts will cease, what will they then retain of the legal
services 2c.? Therefore the prophet threatens here the abolition of the
law or the legal services. But not only this fact must be considered,
for the services of the Gentiles also ceased, but since the prophet
prophesies that the legal services, that is, those commanded and
instituted by the voice of God, were to be done away with, is this not a
clear proof that righteousness cannot be attained by the works of the
law? As much more difficult it was to perform the works of the holy ten
commandments than to perform ceremonies and sacrifices, so much less can
one hope to attain righteousness through the ten commandments.

Therefore, all similar passages that speak of the abdication of the law
must be drawn to this teaching, that righteousness cannot be hoped for
by works, but that we receive forgiveness of sins and are justified by
faith alone.

What then, you will say, was the use of the legal services, or why did
God command them? Certainly, so that the church would have an outward
service in which it would show that it knew God and obeyed His voice.
But God wanted this outward worship to be connected with the inward and
true worship, which is the fear of God and the trust in God\'s mercy
through the promised Seed, whose model was the legal sacrifices. For the
godly saw that God would free the world from sin and eternal death
through the certain sacrifice of His Son. Those who in this faith
performed the outward services of the law, whose obedience was pleasing
to God, but who lacked this faith, God rejected and corrupted as
idolaters, because they believed that they obtained through the blood of
oxen and goats what had to be accomplished through the blood of the Son
of God. The prophets punish this ungodliness everywhere very severely,
as we will say in another passage.

**V. 12. I will make her vines and fig trees desolate, because she says,
\"This is mine.**

**\
**[1132 **XXIV, 230-233.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 2, 12-15.
**W. VI, 1660-1663.** 1133]{.underline}

**The wages that my lovers give me. I will make a forest out of it, so
that the wild animals will eat it.**

Here it is not necessary to invent a secret interpretation. He threatens
not only the destruction of the grain, which the unfavorable weather
brings with it, but also the devastation of the fields and the whole
country, so that the fields, which were once well cultivated and
blessed, will be hiding places for wild animals. Why does the Lord do
this? Why does he not strike the wicked and leave the land for other
people who are better to cultivate and live in? It is because in the
past they did not attribute the blessing to God, who is also kind to the
wicked, but to their idolatry. Thus, in our time, the slaves of the pope
ascribe the prosperity of former times to their worship, but the present
disadvantages they attribute to the gospel.

Thus, in Jeremiah\'s time, the Jews praised the service of the Queen of
Heaven to their listeners \[Jer. 44:17\]. And the Jews at the time of
Christ preferred the Mosaic services to the Gospel. But this stubborn
defense of godlessness forces God to let his wrath go out without
measure, not only against the people, but also against the land itself,
which loses its gifts and its wealth because of the sins of the people.

**V.13. So I will punish her for the days of Baalim, to whom she burns
incense, and adorns herself with headdresses and collars, and goes after
her lovers, and forgets me, says the LORD.**

The foregoing proves sufficiently that he is talking about the
punishments on the synagogue after Christ\'s resurrection. Because he
threatens the desolation of the country and the abdication of the legal
services forever. Therefore, Lyra and others who draw these threats to
the Babylonian captivity are mistaken.

But he calls here as above \[v. 8\] \"the days of Baalim\" preferably
the zeal for the law and the legal services, connected with the contempt
of Christ and the gospel. For how are we to believe that

that God will be pleased when He sees His Son rejected and the most
cherished promises scorned? Therefore, even though they kept the legal
services and offered sacrifices to God who had delivered them from
Egypt, he condemned them, saying that they had forgotten God.

Therefore, the purpose of this whole sermon is that, after he has made
known the gospel of the Son of God and his benefits, we should all
accept it, or expect the same punishments that God has imposed on his
people. For although God hates sins, He is so disposed toward all other
sins that He forgives them more easily, but He cannot suffer the
contempt of His Son, that is, His mercy. Therefore, it is easy to judge
what awaits the papal crowd, which condemns the doctrine of faith as the
most harmful heresy and tries to persuade people to seek help in merits
or works.

**V.14. 15. Therefore, behold, I will entice her, and will bring her
into a wilderness, and speak kindly unto her. Then I will give her her
vineyards from the same place, and the valley of Achor, to open hope.**

Because this passage is full of imagery and therefore somewhat obscure,
commentators have explained it in many ways, but we will not get the
right meaning until we pay careful attention to the order of this
sermon.

The first chapter threatens, after the prophecy of the disaster of the
ten tribes, also the kingdom of Judah, that it will happen that it will
be \"LoAmmi\", not a people. Here the prophet is forced by necessity to
show how God will have a church after the synagogue and the old people
are rejected. Therefore, he said that God would make the number of the
children of Israel as great as the sand of the sea. This very promise of
multiplication sufficiently indicates that only remnants of the old
people will remain.

But if you ask for the cause of such great wrath that God so rejects His
people, the prophet gives it amply in the second chapter, where he
accuses the idolatry of the synagogue, namely, that they have rejected
Christ, and that they have rejected Him.

1134 L. XXIV, 233-23S. \' Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1663-1686. 1135

and rejected the gospel but kept the law, believing that by observing
the law they would please God. This ungodly delusion he calls
fornication, he calls it adultery, he calls it Baal service. Because the
Baal service was taken from the Gentiles, he calls this zeal for the
law, which was connected with the contempt of the gospel, with such a
shameful name, and also adds a whole prophecy of the future misfortune
with which God would punish this idolatry. This part of the sermon is
therefore, as it were, an interpretation of what the prophet briefly
says in the first chapter: \"You are not my people.\"

What follows now serves to interpret the passage with which we began the
second chapter, where the prophet prophesies of the church that God will
have in the world after the synagogue is rejected. The summa of this
passage is that God will prepare a new people for Himself through the
new word of the Gospel. This is the simple opinion of the prophet.

But now we also want to give information about the pictures in a few
words, so that the opinion of the prophet can be recognized more
clearly. When the ancient people were led out of Egypt, they were led
into the wilderness. So the Lord says here of the people of the New
Testament that he will also lead them into the wilderness.

Furthermore, in the desert the Lord spoke with the ancient people on
Mount Sinai. So also here the Lord promises that he will speak with his
people, but in a different way, because at Sinai he spoke with a
frightening voice, but here he speaks sweetly.

After Jericho was taken, the people were led by Joshua into the promised
land, and they had the Valley of Achor, in which Israel was afflicted
because of the sin of Achan \[Jos. 7:19 ff\]. So he also says here that
the church will have its Valley of Achor, that is, cross and dangers,
but the Lord will alleviate them through the certain hope of eternal
life.

Fourth, when the people had gone out of Egypt and were freed from
Pharaoh, they sing praises to God. So, he says, it will also happen in
this new kingdom that they sing praise to God.

for the so glorious salvation. For only here is the true service of God,
that one accepts or believes the word and confesses it, so that through
the preaching of the word others may also be invited to the knowledge of
Christ.

What the prophet then adds to the end of the chapter, about peace, about
the eternal covenant, about the fulfillment, serves to praise the riches
and the gifts of this kingdom.

Compare this opinion, which is thus briefly indicated, with the
interpretations of others, and you will see that there is nothing
forced, nothing remote, nothing inappropriately drawn up, as those must
invent many things who follow a less proper opinion. But now let us
explain the details in order.

The verb \"to entice\" (persuadendi - to talk about) is called XXX in
Hebrew, from which the Greek πεί&ω is undoubtedly derived, and perhaps
also *άπατάω* and *άπάται*, for the Hebrew word is often used for to
deceive (decipere), as Ex. 22, 16: \"When someone talks a virgin\"
(deceperit). Proverbs 1:10: \"My child, when the wicked lure you.\" Jer.
20, 7. \"O Lord, thou hast persuaded me, and I have been persuaded.\"
For it is a word that can be used in both good and evil senses
(vocabulum medium), and it means: to give good words, either with the
intention of helping others or harming others.

Therefore, at this point it belongs quite properly to the teaching of
the Gospel. For this is the right πεί&ω (pitho) or persuasion (suada),
by which the hearts of men are caught. For it does not deter, as the law
does, with threats and torture of punishments, but, although it punishes
sins, it indicates that God wants to forgive sinners for the sake of His
Son, and holds out the sacrifice of the Son of God, so that hearts will
certainly think that God has been satisfied by it.

Therefore, just as the people oppressed by Egypt were extremely pleased
with the message when they heard from Moses that the Lord had appeared
and promised salvation, so the prophet indicates in this passage that
this message will be more sweet and joyful,

1136 **L. XXIV, 235-237.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 2, 14, 15.
W. **VI, 1666-1669.** 1137

when the terrified consciences will hear that God forgives sins and
promises eternal life through His Son\'s death and merit. Through this
teaching, he says, hearts will be so captured and softened that they
will freely follow the Lord who calls them into the wilderness.

Although the prophet mentions the desert only because the old people of
the law, when they were delivered from Egypt, were first led into the
desert, a secret interpretation is not inappropriate, because the world
despises the word of the gospel, holds on to Egypt and enjoys there the
flesh pots and the abundance of bread. On the other hand, the godly
live, as it were, in the wilderness, and are oppressed on every side, 1)
as Christ says \[Matt. 11:5.\], \"To the poor the gospel is preached.\"
And Paul says \[1 Cor. 1, 26.\], \"Not many wise according to the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble, are called. \"2c. And yet even this
wilderness has its blessings, \"in tribulation bread, and in distresses
water,\" as Isaiah Cap. 30, 20. For though the Lord does not give the
church such abundance as the wicked have, yet he gives them their need.
Before he would let the godly lack this, the clouds would have to burst
and bread would have to rain down, as in the desert. For the church has
the promise that if it first seeks the kingdom of God and His
righteousness, everything will flow to it \[Matth. 6, 33\]. For our
heavenly Father knows what we need and is not so hard that if his son
asks him for bread, he should offer him a stone 2c. \[Matth. 7, 9/

But the world does not believe these promises. Therefore, just as
disobedient Israel looks back to the fleshpots, so we see that all
pursue the cares of this temporal life, chasing not hope but riches and
power. Therefore the godly should remember that one must leave Egypt and
expect help from heaven.

Perhaps the desert can also be drawn to the fact that the secular
regiment and the mo-

1\) Erlanger: prsrnunt instead of: xrornuntur.

The church, therefore, seems to be a desert to him who looks at it. For
the distinctions that were in the law concerning persons, times, and
things are abolished, and the custom of all things is released, if we
enjoy them with thanksgiving and without offense. But what is peculiar
to the church, namely the office of teaching, baptism and holy
communion, seems to be insignificant and of no great importance. But
whoever brings out these hidden treasures and puts them in the light,
sees that the church is not a desert but a paradise.

It is XXXXXX XXXX \[I want to her heart

speak\], a Hebrew way of speaking, which Isaiah also uses in a similar
sermon, Cap. 40, 2. \[Vulg.\], \"Speak Jerusalem to the heart.\" But it
means to speak so familiarly and kindly that the heart cannot fail to
rejoice and be filled with a certain confidence in the benevolence.
Here, too, the prophet looks at the example of the ancient people. The
Lord spoke to them on Mount Sinai, but in such an unfriendly and
frightening voice that the frightened hearts could no longer listen to
him and asked Moses to speak. Just as the people there preferred the
voice of a man to the voice of God, because the voice of the law is
unbearable, since we are not able to fulfill it because of our weakness
and the power of Satan, so the church does the opposite here: She
accepts God\'s sweet and friendly voice, but she detests the voice of
men as an unholy one.

What follows now also belongs to it. When the people, who had been led
out of Egypt into the wilderness, came into the land of promise, they
took the cultivated vineyards of the enemies.

Thus he indicates that the church will also have its vineyards, that is,
its spiritual consolation and its gifts, by which the way through the
desert will be relieved of its harshness. For the fact that we hear the
gospel, that we are baptized, that we partake of Holy Communion, we do
not do this for any bodily advantage, nor for this short and miserable
life, which for this reason also resembles a desert, because we have
been given a desert life.

1138 L. XXIV, 237-239. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1669-1672. 1139

After other hardships, there is also danger from wild beasts, that is,
from Satan and his members, but we are looking for comfort concerning
eternal life, that we, freed from sins and death by the Son of God, have
something to rely on in the judgment of God; not our righteousness, but
that which is through faith in the Son of God.

But it is exceedingly sweet that the prophet remembers the valley of
Achor, to which the name is attached from an incident. For when Jericho
was taken, and by this so beautiful success the hearts of all were
called to a certain hope that the land of Canaan should be taken,
suddenly a great disturbance occurred. For since Achan had secretly
stolen a cloak and gold from the booty sanctified by the ban, contrary
to the commandment of the Lord, the sin of an individual was punished by
a general calamity. For the inhabitants of the city of Ai put three
thousand Israelites to flight, and not a few were killed.

This sudden and unexpected calamity made the hearts of all despondent,
for the rest of the inhabitants of the land seemed to draw new courage
from the success of the people of Ai. And the thing itself said that the
Lord, whose fear had come upon all that people, had departed from the
Israelites. Therefore they called it the Valley of Achor, as if it were
a valley of sorrow, because the hearts of all were extremely depressed
by the unexpected defeat. But after Joshua had sanctified the army, and
the misdeed of Achan had come to light, he executed the death penalty on
him, and in this way the anger of the Lord was appeased, and after that
everything went on happily.

In this way, the prophet prophesies to the church that it will happen
that it too will have its Thal Achor, that is, that it will be plagued
with the cross and various dangers. For the wickedness of Satan is well
known, as is his incessant effort to persecute the Word and the faith.
First, he awakens godless teachers who sow false opinions of religion.
Because the world eagerly accepts these, he seizes

He also gives cruel advice and rages with violence against the teachers
of the true religion. For the world can suffer nothing less than that
its idolatry and superstition be punished, as we learn from our bishops
and popes. Both, therefore, bring danger to the godly, that they should
shun ungodly teachings, and that they should patiently suffer the
injustice of tyrants, which they must endure because of the defense of
the pure doctrine.

But this is almost a game and a joke when compared to the struggles that
are aroused by Satan in the hearts of the godly, for although they do
not feel the real terrors of death alone, they alone struggle against
despair and experience the sting of sin that the law sharpens. And it is
not enough that they have experienced this once, daily new struggles
arise, daily new dangers arise, as the 42nd Psalm indicates, which \[v.
8.\] compares the temptations to a storm, in which one flood is born, as
it were, from another, and the waters push and drive one another with
great force. From all sides, therefore, the godly are surrounded with
troubles, as the apostle also says \[2 Cor. 7:5\], \"Outward strife,
inward tribulation.\" But who can enumerate the afflictions of body and
goods with which the godly are afflicted, as the examples of Job,
Lazarus and others show?

This situation or fate of the church is indicated by the prophet when he
mentions the valley of Achor. And also this way of the parable is not
inconsistent, namely that the people of Israel is so afflicted because
of the sin of some Achan. For although the church does not suffer
because it deserves it, like the evildoers, the cause of all misfortune
is sin, which has passed from the first parents to us, and needs many
remedies of the cross, so that it may be killed all at once. For the
saints are most exposed to dangers when they feel the least temptation,
and the flesh, if it is not exercised by daily adversity, gradually
falls into security and sins. Therefore, like a father who loves his
children, God allows His own to be constantly exercised, so that they
learn to pray their

1140 **L. XXIV. 239-241.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 2, 14, 15.
W. **VI. 1672-1875.** 1141

To exercise faith and be patient in perils.

But, you will say, the situation of Christians is hard when they are
tossed about in this way by constant waves of the cross and dangers in
the world! Certainly hard, if they have, as Paul says in the \[first\]
letter to the Corinthians \[Cap. 15, 19.\], nothing but the hope of this
present life. But hear the prophet further, what he adds of the valley
of Achor.

He says, \"I will give her the Valley of Achor to raise hope.\" Here
again he looks at the ancient people who, having been afflicted in the
Valley of Achor by the defeat they received because of the sin of Achan,
after this affliction, through the defeat of the inhabitants of Ai,
regained a certain hope that they would take the land of Canaan, because
everything turned out for the best.

Thus he promises the church that it will happen, when it is so
frightened on all sides by Satan, by the world, by sin and by death,
that the hope will be opened to it that it will not only achieve a
certain victory, but also an eternal one. For the church has first the
word by which salvation is promised to her. Then the godly are not alone
in the dangers, but the Son of God stands by them, who helps the
struggling and restores the weary hearts through the hope of the future
goods, which the word indicates. They are also helped by the Comforter,
the Holy Spirit, who awakens the hearts to prayer and comforts them so
that they do not become discouraged, but firmly believe that Satan has
already been overcome and defeated by Christ, and that now they
themselves must overcome him with the help of Christ. This hope not only
raises the heart, but also brings certain victory, as the histories of
the martyrs show.

Therefore, the wonderful sermons of the apostles came from this passage,
in which they teach and admonish that we should not only not lose heart
in tribulations, but also glory in them. For, as Paul says in Romans 5:3
ff: \"Affliction brings patience, patience brings experience, experience
brings hope, and hope

will not be put to shame.\" Therefore also Lucas \[Cap. 8, 15.\], when
he interprets the parable, says most sweetly: \"The seed of the good
land are they that hear the word, and keep it in a fine and good heart,
and bring forth fruit in patience.\"

Thus, the Valley of Achor was undoubtedly a very fertile valley, but in
it Israel was greatly afflicted. Therefore, the church, which produces
abundantly only the very best fruit (as Christ testifies when he says
\[John 15:5\]: \"I am the vine, you are the branches. He that abideth in
me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit\"), its fruits in
such a way that it is nevertheless in the Valley of Achor, for it is
beset by evils and dangers of every kind. But that it does not succumb,
nor is it overcome by the adversities, is the reason that in this very
valley of affliction hope is given to it. For whoever knows that his
sins have been forgiven him, and that he has been reconciled to God for
the sake of Jesus, the Son of God, and that he has become a child and
heir of God, what misfortune could afflict him? For even if life must be
given up, he knows that he will not lose his life, but will find it and
escape eternal death, as Christ says \[Matth. 10, 39\]. This hope
sustains the church, therefore Paul, when he admonishes Timothy \[2 Ep.
2:8, 11, 12\], commands him \"to keep in remembrance Jesus Christ, who
is risen from the dead, for this is ever certainly true: If we die with
them, we shall live with them; if we suffer, we shall reign with them.

In a similar way also Isaiah remembers in the 65th chapter, v. 10, the
Thale Achor. For we have shown in more than one place in the
interpretation of the prophet Micah that these prophets, as they taught
at the same time, also often used the same words and images. But Isaiah
says thus \[Cap. 65, 9. 10.\], \"I will cause seed to grow out of Jacob,
and out of Judah to possess my mountain: for mine elect shall possess
it, and my servants shall dwell there. And Saron shall be a house for
the host, and the valley of Achor shall become a storehouse for my
people that seek me.\" For the prophets were delighted with the
exceedingly lovely likeness that

[1142 L. XXIV. 241-244. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1675-1678. 1143]{.underline}

The valley of Achor, as the prophet says, is NXXXX XXXX, \"to put up
hope,\" because those (as it says in Psalm \[126, 5.)) who sow with
thirst will reap with joy.

But it is useful to think about this often in the heart, because we feel
how great the abhorrence of the cross is for reason. This is because we
feel that the cross is associated with the wrath of God and with
destruction, that is, we think that the cross is without hope and only a
valley of Achor. But this judgment of reason does not agree with the
prophet, who 1) promises that in this Valley of Achor hope shall be
raised.

Therefore we should learn to be of good courage in peril, and believe
with the faithful Abraham in hope, since there is nothing to hope for
\[Rom. 4, 18.). For \"God is faithful, who does not let us be tempted
beyond our ability,\" but at the same time as the temptation he will
also provide an exit *(Ιχβασιν-*) or escape, as the examples and daily
experience testify. For if even the holy martyrs, who laid down their
lives for Christ\'s sake, nevertheless retained the hope of eternal
life, shall we hold that we, who have not yet resisted to the death,
must cast away hope? Therefore, just as the church has always walked
through this Valley of Achor and has been plagued by various dangers and
hardships, we also see that all the godly have the hope in this very
Valley of Achor that they can despise the dangers and finally be saved.

But it would be an effeminate and weak heart that would want to demand
that God should do better with us than with all the rest of the church
of His saints, yes, than with His Son, who had to go to this Valley of
Achor for this reason, so that a more certain hope of salvation would be
shown to us. Therefore we should follow him as the guide out of this
dangerous way. Just as Micah \[Cap. 2, 13\] calls him a \"breaker\" or
destroyer, so we should also hope that we will break through safely by
his power and help.

1\) Erlanger: instead of: qul.

And we should take this passage all the more seriously because it shows
what the kingdom of Christ is like, namely, not a physical or worldly
kingdom, which is entirely based on the use and handling of things that
are seen before one\'s eyes, but a spiritual kingdom, in which not
things are taught, but hope, as Paul says \[Rom. 8:24 ff\]: \"We are
blessed, but in hope. But the hope that is seen is not hope, for how can
one hope for that which is seen? But if we hope for that which we do not
see, we wait for it through patience.\"

Just as the prophet connects the valley of Achor with hope, in the same
way you see that Paul connects patience with hope. Thus Zechariah Cap.
9. 12. calls the church XXXXX XXXX, \"who are captives,\" but with the
hope of deliverance. For that we believe in the forgiveness of sins
through Christ, and hope for eternal life after the death of this body,
no one can see with the eyes, nor grasp with the hands. Yes, experience
and feeling prove the opposite. For we feel that sin lives and dwells in
us, and everywhere reminders of death appear before our minds and before
our eyes. These are the bonds with which we are all held. But because
the Word promises forgiveness of sins and eternal life, this, which will
certainly be granted to us through Christ, must be grasped and held on
to in hope. This hope does not bring us to shame, but makes us blessed.
But those who do not have this hope are, as Paul says \[1 Cor. 15:19\],
the most miserable of all men.

Therefore, the kingdom of Christ, which the prophet promises here, is a
kingdom of faith; but faith relies on the word alone. The prophets
presented this to the ancient people in such lovely images, which are
interpreted more clearly in the New Testament.

**And there she will sing, as in the days of her youth, when she came
out of Egypt.**

Here, too, the prophet has the ancient people in mind, for so it says in
Ex. 15:1: \"There

1144 **2. XXIV, 244-246.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 2, 15,
**W. VI. I678-I68I.** 1145

Moses and the children of Israel sang this song to the Lord, saying: I
will sing unto the LORD: for he hath done a marvelous thing, he hath
cast horse and chariot into the sea. \"2c. Likewise \[v. 20. f.\], \"And
Miriam the prophetess, Aaron\'s sister, took a timbrel in her hand; and
all the women followed her out with timbrels at the round dance, and
sang: Let us sing to the Lord\" 2c.

But as the church of the old people praised the blessing of bodily
salvation, so, he says, it will happen that the church of the New
Testament will praise the blessing of Christ, that he has overcome death
and the devil, and has done enough for our sins, and has opened up
eternal life for us. This praise is the proper worship of the New
Testament by which not only God is worshipped, but also the Church is
planted and many are invited to the knowledge of Christ.

To this passage add also the passages of Scripture, both Old and New
Testament, which either require the confession of faith before the
world, or praise and extol, and make glorious promises to them that
confess. For this is the voice of joy and salvation in the tabernacles
of the righteous, and a truly joyful song of the victory obtained
through Christ, as the 118th Psalm, v. 15, speaks. For by this song is
not our right praised, but \[v. 16\] \"the right of the Lord,\" which is
a triumphant right, by which kept, \[v. 17:1 \"we die not, but live, and
declare the works of the Lord,\" not ours, as the hypocrites do.

But as the prophet testifies in this passage that those who are in the
Valley of Achor will sing a song of triumph, so the Psalm indicates this
very Valley of Achor by adding \[v. 18\], \"The Lord chastises me well,
but he does not give me over to death.\" And he asks \[v. 19\] \"that
the gates of righteousness may be opened to him,\" that is, he asks to
be admitted to the righteous people or church, washed and cleansed by
the blood of the Son of God, so that when he has entered, he may give
thanks to the Lord.

For what can we miserable people, who are oppressed by sins and death

How can we do otherwise than praise to ourselves and to others the
blessing of such a glorious salvation? as the prophet teaches below
\[Cap. 14:3\], when he prays: \"Forgive us all our sins, and do us good,
and we will offer up the farthings of our lips. For the kingdom of
Christ must be extended, that as many as possible may come to the
knowledge of this benefit and be saved. And if we ourselves do not daily
set this good deed before our eyes, Satan will gradually cause us to
forget it and turn to the cares and riches of the world, thinking that
we have everything to gain from them. And then it is not possible to
beware of idolatry, as Paul calls avarice idolatry \[Col. 3:5\], and the
prophet shows very clearly in the preceding sermon \[Cap. 2:5\] that the
people, having forgotten the Lord, have begun to run after other
paramours.

Therefore, that voice of singing that must never be silenced in the
church is not only pleasing to God, but also highly necessary for us;
therefore, the devil also urges the world to prevent this voice. For the
fact that today the pope condemns our doctrine and desires to abuse the
power of the princes to suppress our churches serves to ensure that the
church should not sing, but remain silent. But because the church cannot
do this, the hatred of our adversaries flares up and they resort to
violence and weapons.

Here it behooves the church to remember what was said above, namely that
we are led by our shepherd Christ into the Valley of Achor, but in such
a way that hope is opened to us. For we have glorious consolations,
which do not keep us silent, but compel us to confess and to sing, even
though the world opposes us with the greatest force, and compels us to
tears through many an injustice.

For who should not take courage when he hears that Christ also will
confess us before the Father at the last day and in the next life, as we
have confessed him in this life? Who should not also suffer death with
joy when he hears that we will find another and better life, if

1146 XXIV. 246-248. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI. I68I-I684.
1147

we have given up this miserable and short life for the sake of Christ?
This is the reason why the church cannot be silent, but all the voices
of the righteous resound, praising the good deeds of Christ and
condemning the trust placed in the law or the works of the law and the
merits of men apart from Christ. For these things must be joined
together, that thou teach not only those things which are true, but also
punish those things which are false, lest the simple be led astray.

Thus the 118th Psalm, which we have quoted above, preaches freely
against the sin of the builders, that is, the teachers among the people
who would reject the cornerstone \[Ps. 118:22\], and the prophet now
adds that the names of the Baalim are to be taken away, against the
delusion of our clever ones who think that one should teach the gospel
in such a way that one nowhere mentions the Pabst and the opponents of
the gospel. We want to leave these delicate teachers to the courts, but
the church should freely rebuke what is contrary to the pure doctrine,
for this is called singing to the Lord in the right way.

**V. 16 Then, saith the LORD, thou shalt call me my husband, and shalt
call me no more my Baal.**

In Hebrew, this saying is significantly more sweet: You will call me
XXXX XXX XXX.

But how Jerome interprets this passage is known, because Lyra says that
also the view of the Jew Solomon is more Christian, who says that the
name \"man\" includes the meaning of love, but \"Baal\" or \"Lord\" that
of fear. And here he draws the short but perceptive (as almost all his
sayings are) saying of Augustine: There is a short (brevis) difference
between law and gospel, fear and love. Fear is now followed by love.
This is a good opinion, but in interpreting the text of the prophets,
one must follow what is most appropriate.

Here the prophet uses an image that is familiar to him, and compares the
right service of God, that is, faith in Christ, with conjugal love,
which

But idolatry or trusting in creatures and one\'s own righteousness he
compares with fornication and adultery, for I also said above that Baal
is not only called a lord, but also a lover, \"a paramour\".

And truly, this passage holds up to us a glorious saying, for it shows
what the rewards are of both right worship and idolatry. In marriage
there is mutual love; by this bond the hearts live most sweetly with
each other. The man cannot do without contact with the woman. In the
same way, the wife finds life without her husband difficult and
unbearable, for she experiences that she is as dear to her husband as he
is to her, as their mutual services also testify.

This, applied to the church, is full of true comfort. For, as Paul says
\[Eph. 5, 29\], the church is fed and cared for by her husband Christ,
since he transfers all his gifts and goods to her, as the above passage
from Ezekiel, Cap. 16, 6, shows.

Those who therefore neglect this husband and follow strange lovers, that
is, who depart from the word and confidence that stands on the mercy of
God through Christ, and follow their aspirations, who invent new
services for themselves without the word, they find people on whom their
love is directed, but they are not loved again as by their husband. For
they have not a husband, but a master who abuses their efforts for his
benefit when it pleases him. It is not necessary to fetch an example
from far away.

The world under the papacy has spent almost all its money and goods on
idolatry. And there was never a ruler, no matter how powerful, who could
have equaled the pope in wealth. This was that shameful fornication and
abandonment of the husband who gave his body and blood to us. But what
reward for this ungodliness did the world finally bear? Did it not love
a Lord, and not a husband? For there was fear and despair connected with
this very service of God, and it was of no avail that they should seek
after their goods

1148 **XXIV, 248-2S0.** Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 2, 16-18.
**W. VI, 4684-IK87.** 1149

The people of the world also put their lives into these services,
because their consciences could not rest in human traditions and works.

Therefore, the opinion of the prophet is: the synagogue, like a shameful
adulteress, has followed the Baalim, whom she served with body and
goods, and yet could not be without fear. But the people of the New
Testament and the true church will love me, as a chaste wife loves her
husband, only and only, and will put all hope in me, and will not call
me a lord, as the adulteress, who must daily fear to be forsaken by the
adulterer, but her husband. For she knows that I care for her, she knows
that I love her, and does not fear that I will leave her. In this way,
the prophet wanted to indicate the full and certain trust that sprouts
from the highest love; this trust is the highest service of God.

Furthermore, this passage clearly shows that the idolaters, when they
honor their idols, consider that they are worshipping the true God, and
that they are not so ignorant that they should pay divine honors to wood
or silver, as also the Lord testifies in Isaiah \[Cap. 29, 13. Matth.
15, 9.\]: \"In vain do they serve me with the commandments of men.\" For
this supreme sentence (majorem) nature has instilled in the hearts of
all pagans, that GOD must be worshipped, who created the world and
everything. But after this there is an infirmity in the subordinate
clause (minore), that reason does not follow the divine services
instituted by the Word, but invents for itself a way by which, as it
thinks, God is honored. However, any worship undertaken without the Word
of GOD is idolatry, however splendid and however difficult it may be.
Therefore, in this passage, the prophet himself calls zeal for the Law a
Baal service and fornication, because although the Law was commanded by
GOD, GOD did not want to be known and worshipped other than in His Son.
Because the synagogue did not perform this obedience or service and
stubbornly opposed the legal services to the Gospel, it is rightly
compared to the servants of Baal.

V. 17 **For I will put away the names of Baalim from their mouths, and
they shall remember them no more.**

This is an easy saying. For where there is the right knowledge of God or
the pure word, idolatry must necessarily cease, just as, after the word
of God has been made known to the German land at this time through the
goodness of God, the ungodly services of masses, the invocation of the
saints, the vows, etc., have ceased, on which men placed a vain hope of
salvation. Therefore, those who in truth desire that superstition and
abuses be put out of the Christian congregation must not do what the
rude rabble are wont to do, that they should hastily tear out the images
from the churches and proceed by force against the idolatrous, but
should speak the word louder to the congregations, and then the false
services will fall away without uproar and without all noise, as long as
they have always been in use.

V. 18 **And I will make a covenant with them in that day, with the
beasts of the field, and with the fowls of the air, and with the
creeping things of the earth.**

We can see that the prophets delighted in comparing the salvation that
came through Christ with that which was granted to the ancient people.
And indeed, if the ancient people trusted so much in the bodily benefits
of God, how much more should we trust and praise and rely on the eternal
salvation that has come through the Son of God!

Therefore, this piece also belongs to the comparison made. For when the
people were led into the promised land, although they had very well
cultivated and fertile fields, because they deviated from the law of the
LORD, the fields were destroyed by locusts, the vineyards by worms, as
Moses had threatened in the fifth book \[Cap. 28, 39\]. There was also
other misfortune, of which the histories mention. As the cause of this
disaster was that the Jews did not keep the law, the Lord promises in
this passage that he will make a covenant with them.

1150 L. XXIV. 2S0-2S3. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1687-1690. 1151

The church has the word of the gospel, by which our worthiness is not
required as in the law, but only mercy is offered through Christ, or the
forgiveness of sins, and the Holy Spirit is given, who assists us that
we may reasonably render the obedience due.

But, you will say, what kind of covenant is this? He does not speak of
beasts, birds and worms, like those that plagued the ancient people, but
he indicates that the church will be defended by God against the power
of sin, the devil and the world, so that its enemies cannot harm it. But
he expressly says: \"I will do\", so that we do not think that this
defense is in our power, but that it will be granted to us from heaven
through the mercy of God, with which he embraces those who believe in
the Son.

Therefore the beasts of the field remain, the birds of the air remain,
the things of the earth remain, and they cannot but harm; but those who
are in Christ\'s kingdom they cannot harm, as Christ says \[Matt.
16:18\], \"The psorts of hell shall not prevail against them.\"

This passage is used to compare what is written in Isa. 11, 6, about the
lambs that will feed together with the wolves, likewise Isa. 35, 9:
\"There will be no lion, and no ravening beast will tread on it. But the
prophet speaks there of the power of the word, which is strong among the
enemies, and soon converts the tyrants, soon the heretics and the
idolaters. But in this passage it is more the actual opinion, taken from
the comparison with the ancient people, that the Lord will keep away
both the devil and his followers, that they cannot harm the church, and
will not take away from the hearts the comfort that is held out in the
Word.

**And I will break bow, sword and war from the land, and will make them
dwell safely.**

Similar sayings are found in Micah 4, 3. f. and Is. 2, 4. 11, 6. ff. and
35, 9. But Paul interprets this saying abundantly in the 5th Cap.

The same is true of the letter to the Romans, where he says, v. 1: \"Now
that we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God\" 2c. And
Isaiah cap. 32, 17. f.: \"And the fruit of righteousness shall be peace,
and the profit of righteousness shall be everlasting quietness and
safety; that my people may dwell in houses of peace, in dwellings of
safety, and in proud rest.\"

It is truly the highest ingratitude, worthy of eternal torment and
eternal fire, if we do not respect such glorious promises, and in the
meantime chase after futile hopes and worldly things. For should we not
rejoice and triumph that we have the Son of God, who became a sacrifice
for our sins and now sits at the right hand of the Father, so that all
things may be quiet and safe for those who rely on his help and
assistance? For what could trouble our hearts, since our sins have been
forgiven and we have been granted this Duke and Regent? What can
separate us from the love of God, who did not spare His Son, but gave
Him up for us all? \[But this cannot be explained in words. And the
prophet will now indicate the cause of such sweet assurance.

By the way, the reader must be reminded that this security is in the
kingdom of Christ, or in the word and faith. For if you look at the
kingdom of the world, you will find everything full of wars, injustice
and murder, as Christ says \[John 16:33\]: \"In me you have peace, but
in the world you are afraid.\" And it has been said above that the
kingdom of Christ is not a kingdom of worldly things, but of hope.

Furthermore, this piece also relates to the comparison made, because
since the people were led into the land of Canaan, they did not possess
it quietly, but had constant battles with the neighboring pagans. That
is why it needed the sword and the bag. But the people of the New
Testament will dwell safely. For even though it has enemies, and enemies
that outnumber it in power, it nevertheless comforts itself with the
word, and hopes for victory through Christ, and conquers and overcomes
all tribulations through the hope of the salvation to come.

[1152 xxiv. 2SS-2SS. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 2, 19. 20. w.
vi, isso-iM. 1153]{.underline}

**V. 19. 20. I will betroth myself to you forever; I will trust with you
in righteousness and judgment, in grace and mercy; yes, in faith I will
betroth myself to you, and you will know the Lord.**

Here the prophet indicates the cause of peace and confident trust,
namely that God betroths Himself to the Church through His Son Christ
Jesus. And truly, these superfluous riches of grace cannot be set forth
in words; therefore, we want to indicate the opinion in a few words and
ask God that He Himself, through His Spirit, impart to our hearts what
cannot be said in due time in words, so that we may at least attain a
bit of this comfort with our thoughts.

First of all, the word \[betroth\] is full of comfort. Therefore, Paul
also likes to compare the union of the church with Christ to the
marriage union, and Christ seems to have enjoyed the parable of the
wedding in his sermons. For he not only tells parables of the wedding,
but also calls his disciples the friends of the bridegroom, just as John
\[John 3:29\] calls Christ the bridegroom; and Christ himself uses this
name when he teaches about his future on the last day. But who could
doubt that he had seen these and similar sermons of the prophets?

Secondly, that he adds the little word \[in eternity\], that indeed
makes the consolation an exceedingly great one. But here again he looks
to the covenant made with the ancient people when the law was given. For
that covenant was not an eternal one, but for a definite time, for since
this nature cannot do enough for the law, the covenant, which had the
condition of fulfilling the law, could not be an everlasting one.

But this covenant is an eternal one, which God has entered into with us,
indeed, by which He has betrothed Himself to us through His Son Christ.
For it is a covenant of grace, in which what we have sinned is not
imputed to us, but is forgiven us because of faith in Christ, as the
prophet tells us.

will be added after. Therefore, nothing can happen to prevent this
covenant from being an everlasting one, because it does not have the
condition, like the covenant of the law, that we should be worthy.

Furthermore, that he says: \"I will betroth myself to you forever\" does
not only mean that Christ\'s kingdom is not a fleshly kingdom, but
because the covenant is an eternal one, those with whom God has entered
into this marriage covenant must also necessarily live forever.
Otherwise, how could it be eternal if those with whom it was made no
longer existed? For a covenant does not stand with one person, but is
between two. Therefore the covenant shows that both are eternal, both
the one from whom the covenant originates and the one with whom the
covenant is made. Thus, in this passage, the prophet indicates
immortality, or life after this life, and resurrection from the dead.

But one must also look at the reasons why he says it is an everlasting
covenant. The first is that he says: \"I will trust with you in
righteousness\", This is the first jewel of the ring that Christ gives
to his church or his bride, namely righteousness, not that which the
world calls righteousness, and which also the law teaches; because the
judge is righteous, therefore he kills the thief with the rope, the
robber with the wheel, the murderer with the sword. But this justice the
thieves, the robbers, the murderers hate. This is not the righteousness
of which the prophet speaks, but the righteousness by which sins are
forgiven for Christ\'s sake.

Thus also Zechariah comforts the church when he says \[Zech. 9, 9.\]:
\"Behold, your king comes to you, a righteous one,\" that is, one who
brings righteousness to sinners. For in this way Paul interprets the
word \"righteousness\": \"God offers at these times the righteousness
that is before Him, that He alone may be righteous, and justify him who
is of faith in Jesus,\" that is, him who believes in Jesus. Thus,
sinners do not flee from the righteous God, but follow Him of their own
free will; indeed, God freely offers Himself to them and comforts them.

1154 L. XXIV, 255-2S7. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I6SS-I696. 1155

This is therefore a new covenant and quite different from the old
covenant. For the law holds God up as threatening punishment to sinners,
but in truth there is no such God apart from Christ. But in Christ He is
a righteous One, that is, the One who justifies the ungodly, \"who
forgives sins and remits iniquity,\" as Micah \[Cap. 7:18, 19\] speaks,
\"and casts them into the depths of the sea.\"

The second cause is that he says: \"I will trust with you in judgment\",
XXXXX. This is the second jewel of the wedding ring with which Christ
adorns his Church, the \"judgment\", namely that he wants to be judge.
And here one must not understand a judgment that would be frightening to
the godly, but it is a judgment that the godly ask for and desire most
of all, that God would help His Church and take vengeance on the enemies
of the Word, as Peter says 2 Peter 2:9: \"The Lord knows how to deliver
the godly from temptation, but to keep the unrighteous for the day of
judgment, to torment them.\"

For the word \"judgment\" comprehends both in itself, the salvation of
the godly and the punishments of the godless. Therefore, the glorious
sayings belong here, which comfort the church that the gates of hell
shall not overpower it, that God will help the church and crush the
enemies, as the 110th Psalm, v. 5. 6. prophesied

Also the histories of the church should have been drawn here, in which
God revealed his judgment to the world. For many years now, Satan has
been going about suppressing the church through ungodly authorities and
falsifying the teachings through shameful teachers. But Germany has seen
that God exercises judgment, and the churches have experienced
salvation, since godless princes have fallen in the midst of their
nobility, and the impure sophists have suffered a death worthy of their
foul life. In impudence and insolence, Eck surpassed all the servants of
the pope, and his last books testify that his aspiration was that he
would also precede the others in toxicity, or at least equal it.
Therefore, the churches seemed to be without a judge for a while, while
the impure man says and does what he wants. But the wrath

God as an avenger was no longer a long time coming. For it is said of
him that when he was stricken with a deadly disease, while mass was
being said at his bedside, he talked, I know not what, of four thousand
gold florins, and cared very little for what was being said at the time
by the monk who was saying mass. And not long after that, the falling
addiction overpowered him, he lost the use of speech, and the wretched
man spat out his soul along with the blood.

The godly are not pleased with these frightening cases, for they would
rather that all expended their effort to expound and spread the teaching
of the gospel, than that they, blaspheming the gospel, should incur
eternal punishment. But since they do not exercise moderation in their
blasphemies, such examples are necessary so that God may testify that He
is the judge and curb the wicked\'s behavior, so that others may mend
their ways and not oppose the Gospel in this way. This is therefore a
happy and necessary judgment for the church, so that it may be saved
from danger and the wicked may fall.

Thirdly, he says: \"I will trust myself with you in grace\", that is, I
will do you good, I will hear your requests, I will give you abundantly
all that you need. This is the third jewel of the wedding ring with
which God has adorned the bride, His Church, through Christ, that He is
kind to her, not only saving her, but also adorning her with many and
great gifts, both spiritual and corporal. For although God allows the
church to be afflicted for a time, He does not suffer it to be consumed
by constant lack and sorrow, but adorns it with teachers, gives godly
authorities, gives peace and the benefits of peace, exercises and
increases faith, kindles love, makes people meek, patient, humble and
obedient. For all this is XXX, and comes from the mercy of God through
Christ, as the Psalm says \[Ps. 68, 19\], Christ will go to heaven to
distribute gifts among people.

[1156 **L. XXIV, 2S7-2S9.** Interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 2, 19-22.
W. **VI, 1696-1699.** 1157]{.underline}

Fourthly, he says, \"I will trust in mercy with thee,\" that is, I will
have mercy on thee; when thou art laden with peril, with crosses and
calamities, I will not fail thee, but will myself bear a part of thy
calamities, as the epistle to the Hebrews says exceedingly sweetly
\[Cap. 4, 15.\] that Christ is a high priest, tempted in all places,
δυνάμενον *συμ- πα&ησαι τάΐς άσ&ενείαις ημών,* who might.

Have compassion on his church, which, though exceedingly weak, is
nevertheless struggling with the greatest difficulties.

Is not this sermon full of the sweetest consolations? For although we
are afflicted in many ways, we know that God cares for us, yes, we know
that our afflictions deceive God, as He says elsewhere \[Zech. 2:8\]:
\"He who touches you touches the apple of My eye.\" And to Saul he cries
down from heaven \[Acts 9:4\], \"Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?\"
This is the fourth gem of this ring, more precious than any diamond or
emerald. Here, therefore, we should look in adversity, and, as the
prophet said just before, hope will be opened to us in the Valley of
Achor.

Although what he adds fifthly: \"I will betroth myself to thee XXXXXX,\"
denotes a right, certain, and firm betrothal, yet it is properly
translated thus: \"In faith I will betroth myself to thee.\" For if we
follow the feeling, it is Christians alone who feel sin; alone, as
forsaken people, are they subject to death and danger. But riches and
advantages of every kind flow to the wicked. Therefore, they seem to be
dear and pleasant to God, while the church, on the other hand, seems to
be abandoned by God in the constant misfortune it has to endure.

Here, therefore, it is necessary that we believe that this betrothal
took place faithfully, and that God, even though we feel the sins, even
though we are afflicted, will nevertheless forgive our sins and save us,
as the Word promises. This faith must be held fast, so that we may
believe in hope, since there is nothing to hope for. For our Bridegroom
will not deceive us, and

What his love for us poor sinners has urged him to promise, he will
faithfully keep, and will not be hindered by our sins, which we
recognize and for which we ask forgiveness. This little piece is the
gold of which this ring is made, and which encloses these precious gems.

The sixth is that he says, \"And you shall know the Lord.\" For in truth
the knowledge of God is not that which the law indicates, that he would
reject and condemn sinners; It is not that which the bodily benefits
indicate, the creation of things, the salvation that was granted to
Israel when it was oppressed by the Egyptians, but that which is
indicated to us by the Son of God, who says that God so loved the world
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoever believes in Him should
not perish but have eternal life \[John 3:16\]. 3, 16.\]. Therefore
Christ also says \[Matth. 11, 27.\]: \"No one knows the Father, except
the Son, and to whom the Son wills to reveal it.\" This is the knowledge
of the covenant that God has made with us, that he will forgive sins,
save from danger, do us good and have mercy on us, for the sake of his
Son, in whom we believe. Thus the prophets gloriously and skillfully
extolled the doctrine of faith to their listeners and their descendants,
but took all the credit away from the law and our works, as if they made
us righteous.

**In that day, saith the LORD, will I hear; I will hear the heavens, and
the heavens shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear corn, and
wine, and oil; and they shall hear Jezreel.**

The prophet cannot get tired of remembering the benefits of the New
Testament. But for this reason he compares them again and again with the
benefits of the ancient people, so that he may inflame the hearts of his
people with such a rich hope and fortify them against the adversity that
lay ahead of them. Therefore, the godly have always looked to these
prophecies and consoled themselves in common misfortune with the hope of
the mercy that would be granted to the world through Christ.

[1158 L. XXIV, 289-262. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1699-1702. 1159]{.underline}

For although the outward form of the church was not always the same, the
way of right teaching was always the same, so that people learned to
comfort themselves with the hope of the benefits that Christ, the
promised seed, would show to the faithful. By this faith the fathers
rose up before the flood of sin and became blessed; by this faith the
godly comforted themselves under the law. By this faith we also overcome
the world and all the troubles of the present life. But those who have
not risen up against sin and death by this faith, neither circumcision,
nor the law, nor any works have been able to help them.

So there was a great reason why the prophets so often inculcated the
good deeds of the future time to their people, because the right
teaching of religion was to be practiced and kept in the church, against
the false opinions of righteousness, works and merit, and at all times
the godly have been placed in the Valley of Achor, and have needed these
as supports, so that they did not, bowed down by misfortune, fall away
completely.

But as for the present passage, the prophet contrasts the time of the
New Testament or grace with the time of the Old Testament or law. For
there the Lord, because the people did not cease to sin, punished their
disobedience by giving them a land of iron and a heaven of brass, as
Moses threatened in the fifth book \[Cap. 28, 23\]. But those who are
under grace and in Christ\'s kingdom, of them he says that earth and
heaven will be at their service according to all their desires, and that
they will lack nothing at all.

But we must by no means think that this is a fleshly promise, as the
Jews dream, for above the prophet said that this people would have the
Valley of Achor, and that hope would be opened to them, but that things
would not be given into their hands immediately. Therefore, the church
will have to endure common misfortunes, with which God will visit the
ungrateful world; it will feel hunger, lack, persecutions, wars;
therefore, if you look at the outward form, it will be

seem as if heaven and earth were against the church and did not listen
to the desires of the afflicted. For although it is true what David says
\[Ps. 37:25\], \"I have never seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
going after bread,\" yet the bread of the church is XXX XXXX XX XXX, a
bread in doldrums.

sal and water in anguish, Isa. 30, 20.

To what, you will say, is this promise to be referred? Certainly to the
spirit that the church, oppressed by misfortune, has God, who is not
silent to the cries or the pleas of His own, but answers and hears. As
therefore Christ Joh. 16, 23. f. after other consolations also adds
this: \"Verily, verily, I say unto you, If ye shall ask anything of the
Father in my name, he will give it you. Until now you have asked nothing
in my name. Ask and you shall receive, that your joy may be full,\" the
prophet here promises the Church that God will hear her prayers and
sighs, because He has confided in her in righteousness, in judgment, in
mercy and in grace.

Thus Zechariah \[Cap. 12, 10.\] promises the spirit of grace and prayer.
For the Church trusts in the mercy of God, which is shown in Christ, and
therefore she cries out in dangers with a certain hope of salvation. For
she sees that God, having given us His Son, has at the same time given
us all that He has, and here you see the glorious light which the New
Testament brings to understand the sayings of the prophets correctly.
For the Gospel clearly indicates the cause of the betrothal and the
hearing, namely the Son of God, for whose sake we are in grace and are
heard, but the prophets have indicated this cause in a hidden way.

But we should also hold such sayings before us and by contemplating them
inflame our hearts, so that in such great dangers, which now oppress the
church from all sides, we can ask with certain confidence for help,
which is so certainly promised by the prophets, and firmly believe that
all creatures will yield to our prayers, even Satan, who after all hates
us to the utmost, especially since the so rich verse of the prophets is
so rich.

[1160 **L. XXIV, 262-264.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 2, 21-23.
W. **VI, 1762-1705.** 1161]{.underline}

hotimgen itself is also added the commandment by which we are commanded
to pray. Therefore, neither our own sins nor the sins of others should
deter us from praying. For God will esteem His truth and His covenant,
which He made with us through His Son, higher than our sins and the sins
of others.

But even here we must not forget the Valley of Achor, for God tends to
postpone help, and He first leads into hell before He leads out again,
He first throws down before He executes, He first kills before He brings
to life. Therefore, the church will not lack the challenge that the
Canaanite woman experienced, Matth. 15, 23. ff, that God turns away from
our prayer, does not hear it, does not care for us 2c. Here it is
necessary to remember that the kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of hope,
and not a kingdom of things that are seen. Therefore, the help is
postponed, but not cancelled. The answer is delayed, but it is not cut
off. Therefore we should learn to be bold bitters who do not cease in
prayer, as Christ says \[Luc. 18:1\]. For God is pleased with this
persistence or insolence, and at the same time faith has its exercise
and increases through it.

But the prophet uses the name \"Jezreel\" again in the meaning as he
used it above \[Cap. 1, 11\], when he said that the day of Jezreel will
be a great day, namely for a seed of grace, not for a seed of wrath, as
in the first chapter, v. 4. f. For here he refers to 1) the church,
which in truth is God\'s seed, since it is planted by the Word and the
Holy Spirit. But the prophet used this name because the kingdom of
Israel was to be scattered among the Gentiles without hope of return, so
that in such great danger and such long-lasting misfortune they might be
comforted by the hope of future blessing through the promised seed, and
know that their descendants would not degenerate into Gentiles in such a
way that they would not accept the kingdom of Christ in great numbers.
And for this cause also the rest is added.

1\) There is one ut too many here in the Wittenberg edition.

**V. 23. And I will keep them for seed in the earth, and will have mercy
on them that were in disgrace, and will say unto them that were not my
people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God.**

Here he indicates the cause of the name, why he calls his people
\"Jezreel\", and it is indeed a glorious name that is full of comfort.
For what force of winds or thunderstorms will be able to destroy the
garden planted by God Himself? since God Himself has thunderstorms and
winds in His hand, and wants this garden planted by Him to be cultivated
and to increase.

Therefore the saying of Christ Matth. 16, 17. f. is right for this name,
because he says to Peter: \"Flesh and blood did not reveal this to you,
but my Father in heaven (here you hear the divine planting or the seed
of God). And I also say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it.\"

Therefore, we should look to this saying in peril, and take comfort in
the fact that the fury of the Turk, the Pope and the devil should not go
so far that God does not preserve a seed on earth, even though it is
sometimes so oppressed by shrubbery and thorns that it cannot be seen,
as in the time of Elijah and Christ.

That he adds: \"I will have mercy on them\" is, as it were, a conclusion
of this rather long and exceedingly sweet sermon about the church of the
New Testament, that the remnants of the kingdom will be gathered to the
church, and that God, after rejecting the unbelieving synagogue, will
call the Gentiles to the fellowship of the church through the preaching
of the gospel, for in this sense Paul cites Rom. 9, 26. this passage.

But elsewhere it has been said that the calling of the Gentiles
overthrows the merit from the law, and proves that Christ\'s kingdom is
only a kingdom of grace. For when the Gentiles, who are without the law,
2) are called to the

2\) sunt is in the Jenaer, but is missing in the Wittenberger and in the
Erlanger.

[11622- XXIV. 264-26\". Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi,
i7vs-i708. 1163]{.underline}

If we believe the gospel and are saved, it is obvious that not
circumcision, not the law, not the works of the law, whatever they may
be, make us righteous, but only faith in Christ. But the prophet alludes
to what he said in the first chapter, v. 6. The name of Israel, which
had been rejected among the Gentiles, is called

\"LoRyhamo\" attached, that is, she has not obtained mercy, but here he
says he will have mercy on her. Therefore, this piece also belongs to
the kingdom of Israel, which is scattered among the Gentiles, which has
been gathered into the true Israel through the Gospel. But \"LoAmmi\",
not a people, are the Gentiles, as Paul interprets it.

**The third chapter.**

**V. 1. And the LORD said unto me, Go again, and woo the woman that is
adulterous and fornicator, as the LORD hath wooed the children of
Israel, and they have turned unto strange gods, and wooed a flagon of
wine.**

This chapter is explained by the interpreters in various ways, because
some understand it of the whole people, as if it were a prophecy of the
last times of this people, when the future of Christ was imminent. For
although the people had kings and the priesthood at that time, the kings
were foreigners, and the priesthood was not legitimate, but was bought
by stingy and powerful people, as the histories indicate. But this view
is contradicted by the fact that the prophet speaks explicitly only of
the children of Israel and the kingdom of Israel, that is, of the ten
tribes that had fallen away from the tribe of Judah through rebellion.

Others, like Lyra, think that this chapter contains a prophecy of the
time of the New Testament and of the conversion of the Jews to Christ,
of which Paul also seems to prophesy Rom. 11, 12.ff. But even these are
mistaken, for what he says here about the conversion to the Lord was
fulfilled, as we have already indicated several times, when the gospel
began to be taught among the Gentiles. We now hold that this is the
simple and certain opinion:

As the designation \[\"children of Israel\"\] indicates, the prophet is
dealing only with the kingdom of Israel in this passage, and promises
that, as

Even if they are scattered among the Gentiles because of their sins, it
will still happen that they will be loved again by the Lord as if he
were a forgiving husband. The godly in the kingdom of Israel had great
need of this consolation, even though they were few in number, so that
they would not think they had been completely rejected, but would
console themselves with the hope of the future Christ and alleviate
their temporal misfortune through the expectation of eternal goods.

And it is not inconsistent or unusual for a prophet to repeat here what
he said in many words in the previous chapter. For how often does Isaiah
foretell the captivity of the kingdom of Judah? How often does he
promise salvation from the Assyrians? How often does he preach about the
kingdom of Christ? But it is clear that this prophet was sent primarily
to the kingdom of Israel. Seeing that it would be scattered among the
Gentiles without mercy, he often inculcates this promise of Christ, so
that the hearts of the godly would not completely despair, broken by the
present calamity.

But we want to compare this sermon with the prophecy of the first
chapter, because this will shed more light on this passage. That one, as
we have heard, was a prophecy of wrath. For since the Lord wanted to
show the people of Israel that he was offended by idolatry and that he
could not avoid hating it, he commands the prophet to consider what kind
of heart a husband could or would have against his adulterous wife.

1164 L. XXIV, 266-268. interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 3, 1. W. VI,
I7V8-I7II. 1165

wife and the children born in adultery, indicating that he has such a
mind against the ten tribes. And for this cause he gives the children
sad names, calling the son a dispersed one, and the daughter he will not
have mercy on. This was a prophecy of wrath.

But what is done by the prophet in this chapter is an exceedingly sweet
prophecy of grace and mercy. For the prophet is presented with another
parable, in which he is not commanded to take a wife, but to love the
adulteress. For to take a wife is easy, but to love is very difficult.
But the prophet is urged by this simile to believe that the husband\'s
heart is exceedingly gentle and kind, who can forget so great an
injustice and accept so shameful an adulteress with love.

Such a heart, says the Lord, I have against the people of Israel,
against the shameful adulteress who leaves me, the Lord, and follows
other gods. Me, he says, she forsakes, I who offer her all things, even
eternal goods. But she follows after those who offer her a cup of wine.
Is this not a great ingratitude and a terrible wickedness? But for this
reason I will not reject this people, but embrace them with the highest
love and unite them to me as if they had never sinned anything.

This is truly a glorious manifestation of mercy, that the Lord testifies
that he will not reject such a shameful adulteress, but will accept her
anew with love. Is not adultery a cause of hatred and moves the husband
to righteous anger? But here hear the prophet, who does not, as before,
threaten dispersion among the heathen, does not deny mercy, but promises
the highest love. Love, however, does not understand anger in itself,
not hatred, not punishment, not pain, not fear, but mercy, grace,
benevolence, joy and complete trust.

Therefore, this sermon is full of consolation, which indicates what is
proper to the Gospel, and

It is his primary duty, namely that God, as it says in John 3:16, loves
the world, that he wants to bestow sins, forgive them, and shower them
with benefits of every kind for the sake of Christ.

Therefore, as the prophets elsewhere portray Christ as a priest who
prays and sacrifices for the sins of his people, as they call him a
shepherd of the sheep, who wields the staff not to chastise the sheep,
but to keep the wolf away and give them quiet pasture, as they call him
a teacher who is given a kind tongue to lift up the sorrowful and
despondent hearts, as they call him a king who is nevertheless a wronged
and a righteous man: so the prophet compares him here to a husband, who,
though his adulterous wife has departed from him and followed other
wooings, yet forgets this supreme ingratitude and this insult, and again
unites himself with her.

What could have been devised that was more lovely? With what other
parable could the mercy of God have been praised in the same way? It is
exceedingly sweet what Christ Himself says \[Luc. 15, 4.\] about the
lost sheep, but this exquisite description of the guilt shows even more
clearly the depths of the divine mercy. With us, who are Gentiles, God
did not have this marriage covenant, which He had with the Jews, and yet
we too, as an unclean birth, are cleansed and adorned by the Lord.

But this should be put into custom. When the adulteress recognizes her
sin, either recalled by misfortune, or from some other cause, she dare
not hope for the benevolence of the husband whom, as she sees, she has
so grievously offended: so our hearts, beholding her impurity, fear the
judgment of God. For it is known that God threatens sinners, and we are
rightly frightened by the examples of others. But we should build up our
courage and grasp the hope of forgiveness. For how can God hate us for
whom He gave His Son? For it is an extremely important saying of Paul
Rom. 5, 8:

1166 L. XXIV, 268-270. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I7II-I714. 1167

\"Therefore praise God for His love toward us, that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us.\"

And rightly we draw from this benefit as from the source of mercy also
other consolations, which Paul remembers in the passage, namely \"that
we are kept from wrath by God, having been cleansed by the blood of
Christ\". Therefore, we are to let go of the fear of God\'s wrath and
judgment because of our sins, and believe what the prophet says here,
that God is like a husband who, although abandoned and grievously
offended by his adulterous wife, is nevertheless moved more by His
goodness than by the sin of the adulteress, and lovingly accepts her
anew.

The prophet has indeed included exceedingly great things on both sides.
For sin could not be portrayed more magnificently than he does here,
since he presents the parable of the adulteress who leaves her husband,
through whose benevolence she possesses everything she has, and yet
follows other lovers for the sake of a cup of wine. But mercy also
gloriously extols the same similitude, since it says that the marriage
spell is ignited by love for the adulteress. For what follows from love
but benevolence of every kind? Therefore, this passage is worthy of
careful attention, so that we may both recognize our sins correctly and
be comforted by this abundance of mercy.

Therefore, this passage actually belongs to the description of the
kingdom of Christ, which is a kingdom of grace and mercy, not a kingdom
of wrath and judgment. This teaching is blasphemed by our adversaries,
as if this price of grace gave freedom to sin. But think how the heart
of the adulteress will stand, whom her husband again receives so
graciously, if she only believes in truth that her husband loves her.
Will not an exceedingly violent pain arise because of the past and so
shameful deed? Will she not then make an effort to do her husband\'s
will, and do and undertake everything in which, as she knows, her
husband is pleased, but flee everything?

and shun what she knows upsets his mind?

Therefore, the mercy of God is not praised to the churches so that
people may abuse it and continue to sin, but so that they may begin to
be all the more eager to continue to do the will of God, which, as they
see, they have so shamefully despised until now.

**V. 2. 3. And I became one with her for fifteen shekels of silver, and
an homer and a half of barley. And I said unto her, Keep thee for a
season, and be not a harlot, neither let another come unto thee: for I
will keep thee also.**

The brevity makes this obscure, but I hope that this view is consistent
with the grammar. The prophet has been commanded to love the adulteress,
but the beginnings of love are only slight. For he does not apply to her
as much as was applied to a maid who had been injured by a bumpy ox, for
her master had to be paid thirty silver shekels according to the law \[2
Mos. 21, 32.\]; here is only half as much. Further, why does he give the
barley so meagerly, and not two full homers?

Jerome follows the opinion of the Jews, who think that there are secrets
in these numbers and refer them to the ancient people, who were redeemed
from Egypt and were adorned with the law on the forty-fifth day.
Although I do not entirely reject this, it is certain that it is not the
real thing. For the simple and right opinion is that the Lord will
scatter Israel among the Gentiles, that they will dwell there in poverty
and hard living, so that in this way he will force them to renounce
idolatry. For the fifteen pieces of silver and the homer and a half of
barley are nothing else than the daily bread and the sad exile among the
Gentiles.

But he shows the reason why God will do this, and scatter his people
among the Gentiles, and suffer them to be kept hard there. Then, he
says, you shall keep yourself mine, and not fornicate; you shall not let
anyone else join you, that is, for this reason I am handing you over to
the Assyrians, so that you may be forced,

[1168 **L. XXIV, 270-273.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 3, 2-4.
**W. VI, 17I4-I7I7.** 1169]{.underline}

to renounce that shameful idolatry which you so stubbornly maintained as
long as the kingdom was at rest.

Therefore, this saying serves to instruct us about the punishments which
God inflicts on us because of sins, namely, that we should consider that
they are not inflicted on us as if God wanted to reject us and corrupt
us in our sins, but so that we, compelled by evil, may refrain from
sinning and be called to repentance by these harsh means, as Paul says
\[1 Cor. 11:32\], \"We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
damned with the world.\" And Isaiah \[Cap. 28, 19.\], \"The temptation
teaches to mark the word.\"

Therefore, after the people were led away from the kingdom, they were
forced to dwell among the Gentiles, and, as stated in the previous
chapter \[vv. 6, 7\], they could not find the way of their prey.
Therefore the hard captivity was useful for the flesh to repent. But the
Lord gives grace to the repentant, has mercy on them and saves them.

**For the children of Israel will remain for a long time without a king,
without princes, without sacrifices, without an altar, without an ephod
and without a sanctuary.**

It is common among the prophets that what they have said under images,
they say straight afterwards without image. Therefore, this piece is an
interpretation of the previous verse. For the small price of the fifteen
pieces of silver and the homer and a half of barley, for which he bought
the adulteress, as it were, so that she would not run after other
suitors, is nothing other than the sad exile among the Gentiles, by whom
the Israelites were harshly held. For they were without king and without
princes, that is, they lived under pagan authorities. Then they had no
sacrifice, that is, they were not allowed by the Gentiles to use their
paternal worship. Therefore, the people of Israel, like an adulteress
forsaken by her lovers, dwelt among the Gentiles and no longer whored in
their land.

In this way God keeps the idolaters in check, because when everything is
well, they do not give way to the teachers of the true religion alone,
who teach them the right things.

The example of the Papists teaches us that the Lord will also force them
to renounce their idolatry, either by the Turk or by another enemy in
his time.

As far as grammar is concerned, the word statuae \[\"altar\"\] in Hebrew
is XXXXX, from set up. It means not only the pillars that are reminders
of events, but also those that are erected for worship, as the passage
Deut. 26:1 testifies: \"You shall not make for yourselves an idol, nor
an image,\" \"nor erect for yourselves a pillar, nor set a painting
stone in your land to worship before it.\" It therefore actually refers
to the images of the calves in Dan and Bethel and other places that the
idolatrous kings had erected.

The Ephod s \"Leibrock\"\] is known from Moses, 2 Mos. 28, 6., because
it was a garment of the high priest, connected with a breast shield or
in which the XXXX XXXXX \[\"light and right\"\] were, things which are
unknown to us, but were called so from what came from it (from eventu),
because those who asked the Lord in doubtful things by \"light and
right\" received instruction by divine revelation about what the Lord
wanted to know. What kind of revelation this was, however, is not known.

XXXX is translated by illumination or light, but XXXX by perfection, no
doubt to indicate the certainty of this revelation that had happened in
the Ephod.

But, you will say, how is this true of the kingdom of Israel? For the
right priesthood and the right services were kept only by the tribe of
Judah. Therefore the ephod was never with Israel, but only with the
kingdom of Judah. I answer: When the godless king Jeroboam had taken the
kingdom by rebellion, he ordered services in the kingdom of Israel that
were similar to the services of Judah. Therefore, as history testifies
that he erected altars and appointed priests, we cannot doubt that he
also adorned his priests after the example of Judah, so that there would
not be an unequal service.

1170 L. XXIV, 273-275. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I7I7-I72O. 1171

made the priesthood of Judah more glorious. Therefore, the prophet
remembers the ephod at this point, so that it indicates the idolatry 1)
which the Lord wanted to punish by such a hard banishment.

And he also connects with the ephod the XXXXX, of which the Scripture
indicates in several places that they were idolatrous images. For this
is what Moses calls the idols of Laban, which Rachel had secretly stolen
from her father, Gen. 31, 34. And when David was sought by the
messengers of Saul, Michal put Theraphim in his place in the bed \[1
Sam. 19, 13.\]. And Ezek. 21, 21. the king of Babylon is accused of
having asked for counsel. Therefore the Jews everywhere interpret it as
idolatrous images, which the pagans used for divination.

**V. 5. After this the children of Israel will turn and seek the Lord
their God and their king David, and will honor the Lord and His grace in
the last days.**

Here begins the sweet sermon that the Lord will accept the adulteress
with right and conjugal love, and will not reject her because of her
adultery, but will trust with her in righteousness and judgment, in
grace and mercy. For the people of Israel remained scattered among the
Gentiles until the gospel was spread among them by the apostles; only
then did they begin to be converted and to seek the Lord their God, and
David their king. Truly, a glorious sermon, if it is interpreted
correctly! For indeed it proves what the Lord says elsewhere \[Ezek.
18:23\]: \"I have no pleasure in the death of the sinner, but that he
should turn and live.\"

But what does \"convert\" mean? Nothing else but obeying the gospel,
which punishes the world because of sin, because of righteousness and
because of judgment. Furthermore, if sin is taken only as an offense
committed against the law, even reason can judge and understand it. But
the Gospel shows that the whole nature of man is corrupted by sin, and
as a poison through all

1\) Erlanger: ostknäit instead of: ostsnüat.

parts of the body. This knowledge depresses the heart and deprives it of
security, and awakens the right fear of the wrath and judgment of God.
And these fears would kill man if the gospel did not connect this
doctrine of sin with the other doctrine of righteousness and judgment.

It does not attribute righteousness to our works, since we are evil by
nature, but to the works of Christ, and commands that we firmly believe
that they belong to us and have been accomplished for us. Through this
faith, hearts are established and begin to love God, and learn to 2)
rely on His mercy. Therefore, judgment follows that they do not fear the
threats of the devil, for they know that he is judged, and do not follow
him as a tyrant, but resist him through the Holy Spirit, and overcome
his attempts through faith.

This, therefore, is the right conversion, that one believes the gospel,
which punishes sin and teaches righteousness and judgment. This
conversion is followed by seeking the Lord, that is, basing themselves
on the Word, keeping the right services, fleeing idolatry, practicing
faith and invocation in perils, provoking others to worship by freely
confessing the Word, and in all things looking to the will of God,
putting away the vexations of the world and the flesh. For all this the
word \"seek\" comprehends in itself, for it denotes the ardent desire
for true religion and for obedience to God, which is connected with the
supreme disregard for the world and this miserable life that we lead
here.

But here notice carefully the words. He says, \"They will seek the LORD
their GOD and David their king.\" What new thing comes up here? For the
word \"seek\" in this passage actually denotes inward worship, as the
69th Psalm, v. 7, testifies: \"Let not them that wait for thee, O LORD
God of hosts, be ashamed in me. Let not them that wait for thee, O LORD
of hosts, be ashamed of me.

2\) Jenaer: Zisount; Wittenberger and Erlanger: 61seant.

[1172 XXIV, 27S-277. interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 3, 5. W. VI,
1720-1722. 1173]{.underline}

seek God Israel. No one will take offense at the fact that these
services are rendered to God, since the prophet uses the right name of
God, Jehovah.

But here the Jews may answer why the worship that is attached to God is
also attached to King David? Shall we worship more than one god? Or will
God give His glory to another? For not only does he say that they will
seek God, but he promises that it will happen that they will also seek
their king David. Therefore, this is a clear testimony that King David
is to be sought with the same desire and eagerness with which the true
God is sought.

But if this is considered inconsistent and ungodly (for God is one God),
the Jews will be forced by necessity to declare that God, Jehovah, and
this King David are one and the same God, since they are to be
worshipped with the same service. But here they may answer, who is that
King David? For it is not the son of Jesse, who, when Jeroboam reigned
in Israel, died about two hundred years ago. And he \[the prophet\]
promises that this David will be sought after after the kingdom of
Israel has lived in captivity for a long time. To this the Jews may
answer, for the saying of the prophet must not be perverted.

But for us who confess that Christ is true God, the answer is easy.
Although he differs from the Father in that he is born of the Father,
there is no difference between him and the Father as far as divinity is
concerned. For God the Father has not been able to beget anything from
His eternal nature that is not eternal, as the epistle to the Hebrews
\[Cap. 1, 3\] calls Christ the image of the Father\'s being and the
splendor of His glory for this reason. And Christ says to Philip John
14:9, 10: \"Philip, he who sees me sees the Father. Do you not believe
that I am in the Father and the Father is in me?\"

But the prophet calls him by the new name \"David\" to indicate that the
eternal Son of God was to be born into this world from the tribe of
David.

and that he might inculcate in the people the promises that had been
made to David concerning the eternal kingdom of the Messiah, just as the
angel remembers this promise, Luc. 1, 32.f.: \"God the Lord will give
him the throne of his father David, and he will be king over the house
of Jacob forever.\"

Therefore, the purpose of this saying is, first, to teach us about the
person of the Messiah or Christ, that he should be born of the seed of
David according to the flesh, so that we do not doubt that he is a true
man, David according to the flesh, and yet, as Micah says, his origin
was from the beginning and from eternity, that is, that he is God by
nature, born of God from eternity, equal with the Father in glory. If
you do not bring this knowledge to Christ, you will never be able to
enjoy his victory, by which he overcame sin, death and the devil. For in
order to overcome these enemies of ours, divine power was necessary,
which is why Paul says in his letter to the Romans \[Cap. 1, 4\] that
Christ was powerfully proved to be a Son of God through the Holy Spirit,
since he rose from the dead.

Secondly, this also serves to teach us about the right worship of God.
For just as without Christ no one knows God, so also without Christ no
one can worship God. When you hear a Turk or a Jew, you hear the name of
God, who created heaven and earth; they call upon him, they praise him,
they confess that they honor him. But they are shameful and wicked
idolaters, for they seek GOD, but the King David they do not seek. But
God wants to be sought, as the prophet testifies here, so that you seek
King David at the same time, that is, that you seek and worship God in
Christ, as Christ says, Matth. 11, 27: \"No one knows the Son, except
the Father, and no one knows the Father, except the Son, and to whom the
Son wills to reveal it.\" What can be said more clearly? Without Christ,
God is not, God is not to be sought without Christ, cannot be found nor
worshipped.

1\) Erlanger: invenire instead of: inveniri.

1174 XXIV. 277-279. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 1722-1726.
1175

Therefore, this is an extremely important saying of the prophet, who in
the service of God connects God, Jehovah, and Christ in such a way that
when we call upon God, we call upon Him through Christ, that when we
hope for the mercy of God, we should hope that God will be merciful to
us through Christ, just as the New Testament everywhere holds Christ up
as the one mediator through whom we have access to God.

That he adds: \"And will honor the Lord and his grace in the last
time\", that actually belongs to the worship of God. But here the
prophet uses the word XXX, which can have two meanings (medium est 68t),
and is sometimes taken in an evil, sometimes in a good sense. For when
Moses threatens the transgressors of the law, Deut. 28, 66, he says it
will happen that they will fear night and day. On the other hand, when
he says of Jacob in Genesis 31:54 that he swore by the fear of his
father Isaac, it is clear that he is talking about God and a blessed
fear. And experience shows that a thief does not fear the executioner
with the same fear 1) as children fear a kind father. But because the
prophet expressly says: They will be afraid of his mercy, - who does not
see that this fear is rather a reverence, and a

1\) Erlanger: timers instead of: timsri.

zealous endeavor that such a gracious God not be offended?

Therefore, the correct opinion is that nothing else will be preached in
the New Testament through the gospel than the immeasurable grace of God
shown through Christ, the Son of God, and that the rest of Israel, who
are then scattered among the Gentiles, will seize it with admiration.

But how does this sermon and this service rhyme with the teaching of
Pabst, who transfers the office of mediator from Christ to the saints,
and preaches not the grace of God, but a harsh and sharp judgment? Then
he urges that men, by their conduct and works, should pacify the heart
of God, which is so hard and unforgiving. These punishments have rightly
followed our ingratitude, since we have not respected the so glorious
sermons of the prophets and have admired the dreams of men.

. Therefore, this chapter provides a special consolation and teaches us
not only about Christ, the true God, but also about His kingdom, that it
is a kingdom in which hearts are not frightened, as by the law, but are
established through trust in the grace that is presented to us in
Christ, through whom God also wants to forgive sinners and receive them
into grace and make them blessed.

**The fourth chapter.**

**V. 1. Hear, O children of Israel, the word of the LORD: for the LORD
hath caused to ring in the land.**

At this point, the chapters are correctly differentiated, because the
prophet begins a new sermon here, which is so suitable for our times
that one could believe that he did not prophesy about his people, but
about us. There are many things from which learned people take the
indication 2) of future events, because

2\) Erlanger: significationis instead of: significationes.

Both the extraordinary phenomena that are seen everywhere do not promise
anything good, and the world\'s trades are gradually coming to the point
that a certain disruption of all orders must finally follow. But indeed,
the most certain signs of the coming misfortune are taken from the way
of life, which is extremely corrupt and degenerated. And with this kind
of proclamation, which is taken from life, come the

3\) Erlanger: impsuditium instead of: impsnäentium.

1176 **L. XXIV, 279-281.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 4, 1. W.
**VI, 1728-1730.** 1177

The prophecies of the prophets agree. For who does not see what Hosea
punished his people for? But since in our times the same vices are
before our eyes, which are going on most violently, can we doubt that it
will have a similar end?

Therefore, this sermon serves for repentance, so that the godly learn
diligently to practice the fear of God for themselves and their
families. For although Germany is facing an unfortunate doom, the Lord
will protect and preserve those who live holy lives in fear and do not
stain themselves with the widespread sins, like Daniel and his
companions, so that they will feel the reward of godliness, just as the
other sinners feel the deserved punishments.

It is a very emphatic preface which Hosea prefaces his prophecy, for he
says that he brings the word of the Lord. Therefore, let no one doubt
that what he threatens will surely follow. And it is a hard thing that
he assures that the Lord has cause to rebuke the people. For who can
stand in the judgment in which he is accused by the Lord? For in this
court, as before a judge, we do not argue with words, but we bring
against ourselves the testimony of our conscience, like a manuscript.

But how does the Lord complain or rebuke? He does not thunder down from
heaven, nor does he send angels as messengers of wrath, but poor,
despised and lowly people, whom the world despises and abhors as scum.

Therefore, the world commits a double sin here. For it not only surely
sins, but also does not want to suffer its sins to be punished. It
accuses the teachers of rebellion and interprets this as blasphemy when
it hears that their sins will be punished. Therefore, the teachers are
distressed on both sides: if they do their duty and accuse the world,
the world is angry and furious; if they do not do the same, God is angry
with them, as Ezekiel \[Cap. 3, 18. 13, 18. 33, 8.\] testifies.
Therefore, the teachers must have great courage and punish the world
freely.

Then it comes to the listeners that they have to

Do not despise the scolding or punishment of the teachers as the words
of men, but accept them with a grateful heart and correct what they hear
is being punished. For this punishment is inflicted so that we, reminded
of our sins, may return to the right path, so that in time of calamity
we may have God as our protector, while wrath will sweep the wicked away
to destruction. But now let us hear the punishment.

**For there is no faithfulness, no love, no word of God in the land.**

Here you can see how wisely the prophet deals with the punishment. He
not only says in what the people sin, but at the same time indicates
what those who desire to escape the wrath of God must do. Just as the
entire Law is therefore summarized in these two main pieces, that it
teaches of service to God and of duties or love toward one\'s neighbor,
so the prophet at this point connects these two pieces with each other
quite cleverly and briefly. \"Faithfulness and love\",

belong to the second panel, the Er

The knowledge of God belongs to the first table. This, therefore, is the
racecourse in which the godly should firmly set themselves to run, if
they wish otherwise to do their duty and escape the wrath of God.

Jerome has his reasons why he believes that from the prophet the mercy
is connected with the truth. But there is nothing to prevent
\"faithfulness\" (veritatem) and \"love\" (misericordiam) from being
taken for one and the same thing, that is, for a true love, and not for
a feigned love, as Paul calls it in the Epistle to Timothy \[1 Ep. 1,
5.\] *άγάπην* ix χα&αρας *χαρδίας,*

\"Love from a pure heart\". For often we do good to others in the hope
of greater benefit, often ambition makes us generous, often shame, but
true love does not seek its own, looks only at God\'s command and the
need of the neighbor. Such love, says the prophet, is nowhere to be
found, therefore the punishment will no longer be absent.

Those who take \"faithfulness\" simply for reliability in words and
deeds

[1178 L. xxiv, Wi-283. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
1730-1732. H79]{.underline}

The words \"love\" and \"charity\" are not wrong, but this too is
included in \"love,\" which the prophet calls \"beneficence\"
(beneficentiam in the Vulgate).

But how did this evil come about in the world, that nothing is true, but
everything is pretended, and nowhere are any signs of true love seen? Of
course, it is because there is no knowledge of God among men, that is,
because men do not respect the Word, because they have no godly
teachers. Therefore, those who wish to heal this disease of the world
must use the true and right remedy, the Word of God; that alone heals
this disease. For the hearts that have been properly instructed about
the will of God are not safe, but begin to fear God and call upon His
name, and fight against sin and keep to the will of God.

But what a completely incurable plague this is! For how 1) many can you
find in Germany, who are determined with all their might that their own
should not come to the knowledge of God, since they oppose the word with
such great zeal and force their subjects to idolatry. Therefore, we
should not doubt that they are in for the same misfortune that the
people of Israel experienced.

In this way the prophet connects the same things below in the sixth
chapter, v. 6. \"I delight in XXX, in love, and not in sacrifice, XXXXX
XXXX, and in knowing

ness of God, and not in the burnt offering.\" And Micah says in the
sixth chapter, v. 8: \"It is told thee, O man, what is good, and what
the LORD requireth of thee, namely, to keep the word of God, and to
love, and to be humble before thy God. Therefore, we should also
remember that we must make an effort to do this if we want to escape
God\'s wrath in any other way.

**V. 2. But blasphemy, lying, murder, stealing and adultery have
abounded, and bloodguilt comes one after another.**

Compare this with our times, and you will say that one egg is not like
another.

1\) Erlanger: instead of: huara.

be similar as our life is to the life of the house of Israel.

The word means a curse, that is, blasphemies and terrifying
imprecations, which children in our country learn almost earlier than
they can speak. Lies in trade and commerce even have the praise of
indicating great prudence. Murder and theft are, as it were, a peculiar
ornament of the nobility. Adultery, according to our customs, is not
even punishable.

In truth, therefore, as the prophet here so appropriately says, XXXX
XXXXX XXXX, \"one blood debt comes after another,\" that is, sins are
heaped upon sins, and one sin supplants another. For this expression is
known from the 51st Psalm, v. 16, that \"blood debts\" are not only
called murderous deeds, but in general all sins that are worthy of
death. But the prophet seems to be referring to the cruel murder of the
holy prophets and to the persecution in the church. But what kind of
fate will finally follow such a depraved life?

**V. 3: Therefore the land will be miserable, and all the inhabitants
will be destroyed; for the beasts of the field and the birds of the air
and the fish of the sea will be destroyed.**

This is a frightening sermon, but experience teaches us that in this way
the punishments of sins rage. The figurative expression in the word
\[stand miserably\"), lament, is well known. For just as the field is
said to laugh when everything is in bloom, so it is said to mourn when
it is barren, spoiled by unfavorable weather. This misfortune is
followed by another, that an external enemy breaks in and devastates
everything. For this means the word s \"it will go badly\").

What he says of the animals of the field and of the birds under the sky,
some explain by the figure of the hypallage, namely that the people
themselves are to be taken away, which the birds under the sky and the
animals of the field used to enjoy. But such an interpretation is not
necessary. For we see that it so happens when the

1180 L. XXIV. 283-28S. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 4, 3. 4. W.
VI, I732-I73S. 1181

The Lord\'s wrath comes when there is a great shortage of all things.
For today there is not the same abundance of fish and birds as was
remembered to have been in former years. If someone says that this is
the punishment of sin, he will certainly not be mistaken. Therefore, I
like to interpret the present passage in this way, that it indicates a
lack and a theurality in all things, which was not so great in the
former times, when the wrath of God was still at rest.

I am very surprised about Jerome. Because he holds exactly this opinion.
For these are his words, which I have gladly put here. He says: \"When
the captivity of the ten tribes has come, after the people have been
taken away, there will also be a lack of animals in the field and birds
under the sky and fish in the sea, and even the dumb elements will feel
the wrath of the Lord. Whoever does not believe that this has happened
to the people of Israel, let him look at Illyria, let him look at
Thrace, Macedonia and Pannonia, and all the land that extends from the
Propontis and the Bosporus to the Julian Alps, and he will realize that
there is a lack not only of men but also of all the animals that were
previously nourished by the Creator for the use of men.

So far Jerome speaks of his times. But who does not see that he
prophesied more correctly of our times, who see and feel that the
devastation of these regions, which he names, was done by the Turk for
the sake of our sins?

**V. 4 But you must not rebuke or punish anyone, for your people are
like those who rebuke the priests.**

The way of speaking is known: XXXXXX XXX, the man shall not rebuke. For
the Hebrews are wont to use the word \"man\" for the indefinite particle
\[man\]. So far the prophet has enumerated the sins of his people. But
that which he has mentioned must be impressed upon our hearts all the
more carefully, because our present age reflects the image of those
times. Therefore, if we do not by true repentance

avert the wrath of the Lord, the same punishment will befall Germany.

But now the prophet adds another sin, which seems to be lesser in
appearance, but is by far the most serious. For the fact that one has
sinned is not something so great as not wanting to suffer the punishment
of sin and to excuse the sins. For where one lives in such a way that
the hearts have an abhorrence of the medicine, the punishment can no
longer fail to come. Therefore, the fact that the prophet says: one must
not rebuke, no one must punish, does not mean that one should not punish
the vices, but indicates that the punishment is futile, that it is not
allowed or tolerated by the people.

This sin, too, is going on enormously in our time. For look at the
church, and you will see that everywhere the teachers are hated, because
they, as the orientation of their office demands, quite freely punish
sins. And especially those who are in a magisterial office have
exceedingly tender ears. For when those who are drunkards hear that
drunkenness is being punished, they think they are being hurt, and that
they are being targeted; those who are adulterers, miserly, unjust
people, take it as an insult when these vices are punished.

But in this way God is even more provoked to anger, for these sins
should either have been refrained from and corrected, or one should have
suffered their frank punishment. For it is not man but God who reproves
and confronts the sinner, as the prophet said in the beginning of the
preface \[v. 1\], and here he uses the same word \[\"reprove\"\] But
when God punishes, we must not hate Him, but worship Him, obey Him and
follow Him. Those who do not do this will hear later what punishment
awaits them.

But with much greater displeasure our adversaries, who do not have the
Word, receive our punishment. For when they hear that their idolatrous
worship is being punished, they also want to silence the teachers with
the sword. Well known are also the examples of the old prophets, of the

1182 D. XXIV, 285-287. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I7S5-I738. 1183

Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and in the New Testament, the history of
Christ and the apostles sufficiently testifies to the agitation with
which the synagogue received the just punishments. In this way, Hosea
shows in this passage that godly teachers will not lack dangers when
they carry out their ministry, because the world does not want to suffer
the punishment.

That he adds: \"Your people are like those who reproach the priests\" is
a peculiar magnification of sin. For in the previous sentence he showed
that the people are of such a nature that they do not want to be
punished by anyone. Here he adds that when they are punished by the
priest, they begin to argue with him and confront him. But this means to
turn everything around. For the people should hear, but the priest
should speak and teach. But the teaching includes the punishment of the
things that are evil. But these they will not suffer. Therefore, you can
find \[nd everywhere, that is, such people who, if they deserve to be
punished by the teachers because of their sins, even punish the teachers
and quarrel with them. But how dangerous it is when someone in a disease
of the body quarrels with the doctor and does not want to obey him! But
it is much more dangerous when the word is thrown away and the
discipline is shaken off. For then what is left to heal the sickness of
the soul?

V. 5 **Therefore you shall fall by day, and the prophet shall fall by
night beside you; so I will put your mother to death.**

This is the punishment that is held against sinners who despise the word
of God. As it happens nowadays, when we exhort the adversaries to the
right religion and threaten that if they continue in their idolatry,
they will be attacked by misfortunes of all kinds, but they not only do
not care about these threats and despise them, but also persuade their
own that these punishments will be inflicted on them because the
religion of the pope is not defended more fiercely, so it happened
exactly in the kingdom of Israel. Since the right prophets were sent to
them, which they had to

The false prophets, who were supposed to admonish the right worship and
punish idolatry, opposed them and strengthened their own in idolatry.

But the Lord threatens both the people and the prophets at this point
that it will happen that they fall. And the fact that he says of the
prophets that they will fall in the night indicates in a figurative way
a very serious circumstance, namely that when misfortune will seize
them, they will also be plagued by the thorns of an evil conscience,
that they have brought the people into such great misery only for the
sake of their belly.

**V. 6. my fullness is gone, because it will not learn. 1)**

This is the most wicked thing, when God sends His word, and the world
refuses to accept it, and rather keeps its, usual idolatry. In Hebrew,
this saying is extraordinarily well rounded and delicate: XXXXX XXXX XXX
XXXX, my people are devastated without

Knowledge (scientia). For the word scientia, as stated above \[v. 1\],
is taken for knowledge of God. Since this can only be obtained from the
word of God, I have retained the term \"word\", although the prophet
does not say that they completely lacked the word, but because, although
they had the word, they did not want to accept it. A similar saying is
in Solomon \[Prov. 29:18.\], \"When the prophecy is out, the people
become wild and desolate.\" And Amos also teaches the same, since he
threatens \[Cap. 8, 11.\] a hunger, not for bread. Therefore, princes
and the secular regiment should kiss the gift of the word, for if it is
either lost or disregarded, certain desolation follows,

**For thou rejectest the word of God, therefore will I also forbid thee,
that thou be not my priest. You forget the law of your God, therefore I
will also forget your other.**

1\) Vulgate: Oontleuit populus rusus, so quoä non tiuduerit sei kntiaru.
Luther rendered the same as follows: ?ox \"n1n8 rnen8 psrit, qnia 68t
sine verbo. Both versions are referred to in the following
interpretation.

1184 **L. LXIV. 287-28S.** Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. **4, 6. W.
VI. I738-I74I.** 1185

This is the other part of the complaint, in which he actually complains
about the priests. For the most noble office of the priests is to teach
the church, and not only to establish the right services, but also to
cut off the aversions, and to exhort the people to a holy life. But they
do nothing less than that, says Hosea. Therefore I will also destroy
them, and the ministry in which they are shall not save them.

But this passage is worth paying attention to. For not only the Jews
protected themselves with the dignity of the office, as the examples of
the prophets show, whom the priests, trusting in their office, opposed,
as if the law could not get away from the priest, nor the counsel from
the wise man, nor the word from the prophets. But the same thing is done
today by the pope, the cardinals and the bishops, for they claim the
name of the church for the sake of the office that must be necessary in
the church, and with this they cover, as it were with a cloak,
everything that has been brought into the church by them in ungodly
teachings and services, as if in fact those who are in office could not
err, or the church were bound to a certain order, and not rather to the
word.

It is true that the ministry of preaching is only in the church, but
even the ministry of preaching has its definite limits within which it
must keep. It does not give the power to establish new services, it does
not release from obedience to the Word, it does not excuse sins, it does
not change what Christ has given to the church and what he has
instituted, but, as Christ says of the Holy Spirit \[John 15:26 ff\],
\"He will testify of me, and you also will testify,\" those who are in
the preaching office must keep this testimony and nowhere deviate from
it. But if they deviate, they lose the preaching ministry, that is,
their listeners are forced by God\'s commandment not to obey them, as
Christ says \[Matth. 7, 15.\]: \"Beware of false prophets.\"

And of the priesthood of the Jews it is known that the succession in the
same H of

1\) Instead of Sam in the editions it would be better to read ejus.
After that we have translated.

God commanded, and a certain place was appointed for their worship. This
is certainly not the case in the New Testament, for only Christ has and
exercises the name and office of a priest. And yet the priesthood of the
ancient people, which God had ordained, was bound to the Word.
Therefore, those who deviated from the Word erred, as the passage in
Ezekiel says about the right priesthood of Judah: \"There shall be no
more law with the priests, nor counsel with the ancients\", Ezek. 7, 26.
And Hosea says here clearly: \"For you reject the Word of God, therefore
I will also reject you, that you shall not be My priest. You forget the
law of your God, therefore I will also forget your children,\" that is,
I will reject the succession to the priesthood.

If this, I say, happened to the ancient priesthood, whose succession was
commanded by God, what then do the pope, the cardinals and the bishops
hold against us their titles and 2) the preaching office? First of all,
let them prove to us that they hold fast the word, that they teach
nothing contrary to what was instituted by Christ, that they have
changed nothing of what Christ commanded and ordered, and let us
acknowledge that their preaching ministry is one that all should obey,
according to the saying \[Luc. 10, 16\]: \"He who hears you hears me\";
likewise \[Joh. 15, 26. 27.\]: \"The Holy Spirit will testify of me, and
you also will testify.\"

But since they can be convicted that they have brought such things into
the church, which Christ has forbidden, as there is the commandment of
the marriageless state, for Christ \[Matth. 19, 12.The pope generally
forbids all ministers of the church to marry; likewise, that they have
changed things instituted and commanded by Christ, such as the use of
the whole sacrament; likewise, that they have instituted new doctrines
and new services of which the first church knew nothing, such as masses
for the living and the dead, the invocation of the saints, intercessions
for the dead, and the like: so we say with Hosea to the church

2\) Erlanger: at instead of: 6t.

1186 xxiv. 28S-2S2. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1741-1743.
1187

of the Pabst: You have rejected the Word, therefore you are not a priest
of GOD, but GOD has also rejected you.

And with us, the reputation of the popes or bishops, after they have
departed from the word, is no more valid than that of any private
person, because they do not have such a succession (successionem), which
could last without the word, but the preaching office is bound to the
word. Whoever does not follow this, whoever changes anything about it,
whoever adds anything to it, whether he be a priest or a bishop, let him
be accursed, and not only not the head, but not even a member of the
true church, according to the saying of Paul \[Gal. 1:8\]: \"If anyone
preaches the gospel otherwise, let him be accursed,\" even if an angel
from heaven should do so.

**V. 7. the more they sin against me, the more I will disgrace their
honor.**

The word XXXX, according to their quantity, is ambiguous, for it can
refer either to the increase of persons, or to that of things, or to the
blessing that the priests stood in great honor and were enriched by God
with goods of every kind, but after they had misused these gifts for
avarice and sins, the Lord would punish them, not only by taking away
these things, but also by showering them with various evils.

In this way Jeremiah complains about all the people \[Jer. 2:7\], \"I
brought you into a good land to eat its fruit and goods. And when ye
came in, ye polluted my land.\"

But here the prophet uses the sublime word XXXX \[\"honor\"\], so that
it may be seen that he is speaking only of the most distinguished part
of the people, that is, of the priests whom God wanted to be in the land
to teach the people about God and worship, to petition God for the
people, and also to perform the sacrifices for the people. All this is
very noble, but because they depart from the word, and do not do that
which is their office: so he says: I will take this ornament, that is,
the office itself, from them,

and fill them with shame, so that they will see that their worship is
useless and does not please me.

**V. 8. They devour the sin offerings of my people and are eager for
their sins.**

The word \"sin,\" XXXX, is used not merely for guilt, but also for the
atonement of guilt, or sacrifice, as Paul, following this Hebrew idiom,
also says \[2 Cor. 5:21\], \"Let Christ be made sin for us,\" that is,
the sacrificial lamb or sacrifice for sins. In this sense it is also
taken in this passage. In the second part of our saying there is another
way of speaking, they lifted up their souls. Although some explain it
differently, it seems to be interpreted most correctly of the great
desire with which someone eagerly desires something.

But what a new thing is revealed here! Was it sin to eat of the
sacrifices and of the altar? Why then were those who were not priests so
seriously forbidden to eat of the sacrifices? Why does Malachi \[Cap. 1,
8.\] threaten so severely those who offer lean and defective sacrificial
animals? But this is not the sin which the prophet here so earnestly
condemns; he has to do with something greater and more important, as the
following words indicate, namely, that the priests, in order to have the
richer profit, provoked the people to the Mosaic sacrifices, but taught
nothing of the true sacrifice of the Son of God. But before we indicate
the meaning, the nature of the sacrifices of the Old Testament must be
explained in a few words.

The people of the Law had their services, which were instituted for a
certain period of time, so that they would have an opportunity to
demonstrate their obedience to God (for they were commanded by God), and
at the same time so that they would be distinguished from other peoples
who used such services, which were either devised by themselves or
adopted from elsewhere without any commandment from God. Moreover, the
sacrifices of the ancient people were also images that were to remind
the people of the right and eternal sacrifice that was to be offered
through the Son of God. But even though among

1188 **L. XXIV. 2S2-294.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 4, 8-11.
**W. VI. 1743-1746.** 1189

These sacrifices were said to be sacrifices for sin, but in general all
sacrifices were considered a worship service, and according to the law
the priests were allowed to eat of what was sacrificed, as is clear from
Moses.

But these services did not have the promise of the forgiveness of sins
before GOD. For for this purpose another sacrificial lamb was appointed,
the Son of God, as John therefore calls Him \[John 1:29\] \"God\'s
Lamb,\" that is, appointed by God to become the sacrifice for the sins
of the world. Therefore, in this passage he does not condemn that the
priests ate of the sacrifices, but he condemns the doctrine that they
taught that by these legal sacrifices forgiveness of sins and
righteousness were obtained. For since the people were corrupted by this
delusion, they sacrificed all the more abundantly.

We have also experienced this in the papacy, because the delusion of
merit and righteousness opened all the treasures of the rich. Now that
it is taught that forgiveness of sins and salvation can only be obtained
through faith in Christ, but that one must do good works as an obedience
owed to God, there is no one who wants to help the church, the ministers
of the Word and the poor. Therefore, a twofold sin occurs here: the
first and most serious is the falsification of pure doctrine, the other
is avarice, which causes the doctrine to be falsified.

Hence the opinion that the priests, for the sake of their profit, taught
the people that sins would be taken away through sacrifices, as today
the papists teach that one must attain righteousness through masses and
alms. From this arose an exceedingly rich profit. And this is called
\"devouring the sin offerings of the people and being eager for their
sins\", because the sins gave the occasion to offer many sacrifices.

Thus, under the papacy, since it was believed that a murder would be
atoned for by undertaking a pilgrimage to Rome or Compostella, it was
extremely pleasing to the papists if as many murders as possible were
committed. Since it was believed that the most serious sins would be
expiated by indulgences, this was an extremely rich gift.

It was profitable for the papists if there were as many great sinners as
possible. Yes, what is also shameful to say, it was profitable for the
bishops that the priests lived in the most shameful way, because from
the concubines \[of the priests\] they had a very large income. But what
does the prophet say about his priests?

V. 9 **Therefore it shall be to the people as it is to the priest; for I
will punish their doings and repay them according to their deserts.**

How exactly everything fits our times! The papists boast of the peace
and prosperity of former times, and attribute it to their worship and
idolatry. But if you want to know the true cause of this prosperity, it
is none other than that the Lord did not afflict their sins and their
ways in those days. He kept his eyes shut, as it were, and was like one
who does not see, but he will not slumber nor sleep forever. But now he
opens his eyes and repays the idolaters, just as he threatens Israel.

**V. 10: That they may eat, and not be satisfied, and commit
fornication, and shall not prosper: because they have forsaken the Lord,
and have no respect unto him.**

That is, they will be overwhelmed with misfortune of all kinds. The
advantages of the former times will cease and fornication will no longer
be successful. The papists praise the masses, the public supplications
made in honor of the saints, and do not yet abandon this fornication.
They still insist on these services in public dangers, but, as the
prophet says, XXXXX XXX XXXX, they fornicate, but it does not go well
with them, they do not obtain what they want. They are sunk deeper into
dangers and misfortunes day by day, as experience shows. If they would
stop idolatry and pay attention to the Lord, that is, if they would
accept the pure doctrine and stop idolatrous worship, they would be
happier. But they do not believe this, therefore they will perish.

V. 11. **Fornication, wine and must make mad.**

So far, the prophet has mentioned the sins in general, both of the
people and of the people.

1190 L. LXIV, 294-296. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1746-1749. 1191

the priest or teacher, and also spoke of the punishments. Now he
preaches a special sermon about fornication, that is, about idolatry,
because the prophet has this before others as something special, that he
attacks idolatry extremely vehemently as the head of sin. For as good
fruit follows from faith, which is a good tree, so sins of all kinds
follow from false trust, which is idolatry.

It is not uncommon for this saying to be applied to carnal fornication,
and this view is not inconsistent. For the examples teach that those who
are entangled in this vice do not consider anything, but, as if they
were senseless, throw themselves wherever their evil-consulting
unchastity drives them. And the similarity, both of the attitudes and
the outcome, moved the prophet to transfer fornication to the pursuit of
idolatry. For everything is the same on both sides, except that
spiritual fornication is more serious and in innumerable ways more
dangerous, for hearts that are thus possessed and infected cannot easily
be cured. For it is thought to be spirituality \[Col. 2, 23.\] and the
highest worship of God. In physical fornication, on the other hand,
there is an obvious shamefulness that can neither be excused nor
defended before men, nor before the conscience. Then people cease to sin
after they are afflicted with the damage that shameful fornication
brings.

Therefore we see in the history of the Gospel that the Pharisees, the
great fornicators, that is, the idolaters who were puffed up by the
delusion of their own righteousness, are quite incorrigible, and Christ
freely reproaches them \[Matt. 21:31, 1 that fornicators and publicans
may enter the kingdom of heaven rather than they.

It is obvious, however, that this saying was in general use and was used
as a proverb: \"Fornication, wine and must make mad\", because these two
vices, fornication and drunkenness, occupy the mind of man in such a way
that he cannot think, speak or do anything that would be worthy of him.
Therefore, the boy Cyrus aptly says in Xenophon that poison is added to
wine.

because he saw that the drunkards waver in mind as well as in body.
This, it seems, is what the comic poet \[Terence\] wanted to express
when he has a hulking young man say: After I have risen, neither my feet
nor my mind will do their duty. And the saying of Archilochus about
impure love is well known:

*ερως*

> *πολλην χατ άχλόν όμμάτων εχευεν χλέψας ίχ στη&έων άπαλάς φρέζας.*

\[Love showers the eyes with deep darkness, stealing the lovely insight
from the heart\]. And this was the cause why the poets portrayed love as
blind. For since it is in truth blind, no one is understanding in love.
But in a far more dangerous way the heart is moved after 1) it has
departed from the trust that must be placed in God. This fornication is
the most harmful, and \"makes mad\", as the prophet says. For if one
loses the word, one loses the knowledge of God. And not only this, but
the hearts are filled with hatred against God and the Word, and all
diligence is spent in defending idolatry. But what counsel, what outcome
follows this ungodliness, is not hidden; known are the dangers into
which a shameful love plunges people; known are the countless evils that
drunkenness brings with it. But all this surpasses spiritual
fornication, which is followed both by extreme dangers and certain
destruction of the soul.

Against fornication there are very serious sermons in Paul and Solomon,
and all the histories, both sacred and secular, are full of frightening
examples by which God shows how much He hates fornication.

Drunkenness is also detestable in many respects, which Christ also seeks
to make detestable to us by the name that it weighs down the hearts, as
the prophet also preaches in this passage. He says \[Luc. 21, 34.\],
\"Beware lest your hearts be burdened with eating and drinking.\" For it
ent-

1\) Erlanger: xost\^as instead of:

[1192 **XXIV, 2S6-M8.** Interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 4, 11. 12.
**W. VI, 1749-1752.** 119Z]{.underline}

a twofold evil springs from it. We are forced by God\'s command to work,
and to work in a certain way. The work, however, requires diligence and
a good reputation. But this cannot be where the hearts are weighed down
by wine. But the higher the station in which you see yourself placed by
God, the more carefully you must guard against drunkenness, which does
not allow anything to be done properly.

The other evil is that hearts weighed down by wine are quite unskilled
in speaking and praying. Therefore they are, as it were, deprived of the
protection of the angels who are around those who fear the Lord; they
are exposed to the tyranny of Satan, and, as Christ says \[Luc. 21:35\],
are assailed by dangers before they mean it. If this be rightly
considered, it will move godly hearts to beware of drunkenness. And Paul
says with a serious word \[sEph. 5, 18\]: \"Do not get drunk with wine,
from which follows a disorderly life,\" that is, those who give
themselves over to drunkenness degenerate and become wild and get into a
dissolute life in general. Thus Seneca says finely: \"The vices that one
has adopted through wine continue even without wine. But let us return
to the prophet, who will now show how fornication takes away the mind or
makes it mad.

V. 12. **My people shall ask his wood, and his staff shall preach unto
him.**

The Hebrews use the word like the Greeks the word *έρωταν* and the
Latins the word rogare for ask or request. And it seems most fitting in
this place to take it as a request, so that the sense would be: they
call upon the wood, from the wood they ask for help in dangers, as
also 1) the pope has introduced the invocation of the images in the
church. For it was believed that the images of the saints would bring
greater salvation to those who invoked them in certain places. But what
can be more foolish, what can be more contrary to common sense, than
that one should seek help from

1\) Erlanger: HnoHuarn instead of: Huoyus.

than to believe that the wood understands what you move in your heart
and say with your tongue?

Therefore, Isaiah treats this nonsense of men in a long sermon, Cap. 44,
2) 15-17 . \"The master,\" he says, \"takes of the firewood, whereof one
takes to warm himself, and which one kindles, and bakes bread therewith.
There he makes a god of it and worships it, he makes an idol of it and
kneels down before it. Half of it he burns in the fire, and over the
other half he eats meat, he roasts a roast, and satiates himself, and
warms himself also, saying, Hoja, I am warmed, I see my delight in the
fire. But the rest he makes his god, that it may be his idol, before
which he kneels, and falls down, and prays, saying, Save me, for thou
art my God.\" This is a rich interpretation of what Hosea says they ask
the wood.

What follows in Isaiah \[Cap. 44, 18-20.\] explains what Hosea says that
fornication makes mad: \"They know nothing, and understand nothing;
their eyes are blinded, that they cannot see, and their hearts cannot
perceive. For such a man entereth not into his heart; no understanding
nor wit is in him to say: I have burned half of this wood with fire, and
have baked bread on the coals, and roasted meat, how then should I make
the rest an idol, and why should I kneel to a log? Therefore the same
wood gives ashes, and inclines the deceived heart toward it, since it
cannot save the soul. And yet a man does not realize that what his right
hand is doing is a lie\" 2c. I have preferred to reproduce the meaning
rather than the words, which an understanding reader will not blame.

And this is also the reason why everywhere in Scripture the use of
images is so strongly condemned, and why we also admonish that annoying
images should not be tolerated in the churches. For though this makes no
impression on those who are instructed in the Word, yet it should have
been prevented for the sake of the unintelligent, for when the cause of
offense is removed,

2\) In the editions: oax. 40.

1194 L. XXIV, 298-300. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1752-1755. 1195

there is less danger. And one should not look only at what people do;
this is the workshop of the devil, who does not cease to destroy the
churches as long as the occasion for such sins exists publicly. And with
us the use of the images can be defended all the less, because most of
them are lying, and, as the prophet says here, are nothing but wood. For
what are the image pillars of George and Margaretha but inventions of
the Greeks, Perseus and Andromeda? The right images, however, can have
some use, namely, that they remind us of history; but since these are
also misused for idolatry, they should be discarded, as we have
explained more extensively in the interpretation of Micah.

**For the spirit of fornication seduces them to commit fornication
against their God.**

This statement is to be particularly noted for the sake of contrast. For
just as Zechariah calls the Holy Spirit \"the Spirit of grace\" \[Zech.
12, 10.For just as Zechariah calls the Holy Spirit \"the Spirit of
grace\" \[Zech. 12:10\], who testifies of Christ and makes known to us
the kind will of God, that He will not condemn those who accept Christ
for their sins, so Hosea calls the evil spirit XXXXX XXX \[the spirit of
fornication\], who takes away the right thoughts of God from the hearts,
and either falsifies the Word or suppresses it altogether, and fills the
hearts with trust in creatures, which is true idolatry. For not only the
worship of images is to be considered idolatry, but also the trust in
one\'s own righteousness, works and merits, in the wealth and power of
men. And this is as the most common, so also the most harmful idolatry,
as Paul calls avarice an idolatry. How ungodly do you think it is to
trust in these things and to abandon trust in the eternal and almighty
God?

**V. 13. Up on the mountains they sacrifice, and on the hills they burn
incense, under the oaks and limes and beeches, for they have fine
shade.**

1\) Erlanger: Huoä instead of: tzuam.

This is another kind of idolatry. For although these sacrifices were
done in honor of the true GOD, the fault was that they were done in a
place that GOD had not indicated nor commanded them. Therefore, there
was disobedience involved in these services, for GOD had appointed a
certain place for the outward services, namely, in Jerusalem or in the
Temple, but the Kingdom of Israel sacrificed in other places. Therefore,
it must be noted that these services were punished because they were
connected with disobedience, and were undertaken not according to the
precepts of the Word, but according to the counsel of individuals. It is
often said, however, that these are not services which are undertaken
without the Word of God, according to the saying of Christ \[Matt.
15:9\]: \"In vain do they serve me with the commandments of men.\" What
follows now shows the punishments of idolatry.

**V. 13. 14. Therefore your daughters also shall become harlots, and
your brides adulteresses. Neither will I prevent your daughters and your
brides from being defiled and becoming harlots, because you worship with
harlots and sacrifice with harlots. For the foolish people want to be
beaten.**

Truly, a severe punishment of idolatry, which also extends to the
descendants. For all this is figuratively spoken. The Greeks say that
maids follow the manners of their mistresses, and experience teaches
that children imitate the shameful life of their parents. So it will
also happen here, says the prophet, the idolatrous parents will also
have idolatrous children.

To this punishment he adds a far more severe one, that he says it will
happen that the Lord will not visit this fornication, that is, that he
will allow them to be guided by their will and will not defend the
erring people by punishments. For chastisement indicates, as we said
above \[Cap. 2, 7.\], that God cares for us, that God is concerned that
He keep us, that He thus keeps us from sinning. But when God leaves
people to themselves, that is only the most severe wrath. Therefore

[1196 D. XXIV, 300-303. interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 4, 13-15. W.
VI, I7SS-I7S8. 1197]{.underline}

The word \"I will not resist\" (visitabo in the Vulgate) is here
actually taken for the fact that the Lord will not bring the erring
people back on the right path by His chastisement, but that they will
suffer to fall from one sin into another, as Paul preaches in the first
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans \[v. 19\] about the Gentiles who
have departed from the knowledge of God, which nature has given them.

But the prophet undoubtedly looks at the descendants of the synagogue
who would reject the gospel. For now this wretched people is in error,
and in this error it will surely continue. This saying should wake us up
to the fact that we should diligently take care of the word of God. For
what do those who do not respect God\'s word do but leave godless
descendants behind them?

But what is the end of the wicked, that is, of those who either do not
have the word or do not respect the word, is indicated by the prophet
when he closes this sermon and says: \"The foolish people,\" that is,
those who do not want to be instructed by the word and do not respect
the word, \"will be defeated,\" as he also said above \[v. 6\]: \"My
people have perished because they did not want to learn. For what else
should God do with those to whom he gives his word, and yet who will not
be instructed by the word, but that he gives them over in a hardened
mind, that is, that he leaves them to their counsels until they perish?
This is the end of idolatry and godlessness.

As far as grammar is concerned, the word XXXX, in this place, means: to
be set apart or separated after leaving the church or the assembly of
the people of God for a special service.

**V.15. Will you, O Israel, go to whoredom, lest Judah also be guilty?
Go not to Gilgal, and come not up to Bethaven, and swear not, As the
LORD liveth.**

To the long punishment the prophet adds an exhortation to the kingdom of
Judah, lest, after the example of Israel, it also be deprived of the
true

The first church was so corrupted by the example of the children of Cain
that only eight souls were finally saved from this contagious plague.
The first church was so corrupted by the example of the children of Cain
that finally only eight souls were saved from this contagious plague.
The idolatry of the Moabites and other pagans became a trap for the
people in the desert. Solomon, who was otherwise an exceedingly
excellent man, was harmed by his affinity with the kings of Egypt, so
that he even set up the worship services of the Egyptians. Finally, the
kingdom of Judah learned to sin by the example of the kingdom of Israel,
as the histories show.

Therefore, Paul rightly compares the aergerniss with the leaven, which,
even if it is very small, nevertheless leavens the whole dough gradually
\[Gal. 5:9, 1 Cor. 5:6\]. Therefore, both the rulers of the churches and
the Christian authorities must take great care to counteract in good
time the emerging upsets. For they are indeed a seed of the devil, so
that whatever part of the church it has taken over, it grows again so
abundantly that it cannot be eradicated.

Gilgal is a place known from the fourth and fifth chapters of the Book
of Joshua. For there is erected a memorial mark of twelve stones to
preserve the memory of the drying up of the Jordan. There the new
people, born and raised in the wilderness, were circumcised. The
Passover to the Lord was also celebrated there. This gave the place a
divine reputation among the descendants. Therefore, when the kingdom of
Israel separated from Judah, the idolaters began to worship God there as
a holy place.

About BethAven one is doubtful. Jos. 7, 2. a city of this name is
mentioned, but the prophets did not mention that an idolatry was done
there. Therefore, I believe that the prophet uses this name to refer to
the city of BethEl, where Jeroboam set up the golden calf. BethEl is
known from the first book of Moses, Cap. 28, 19. 28:19; for when it was
called Lus before, Jacob would call it BethEl, because there he had seen
heaven open, and the angels ascending and descending upon the earth.

1198 L. XXIV. 303-305. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1758-1760. 1199

the leader. For he thus says \[v. 17.\], \"How holy is this place! Here
is nothing else but God\'s house, and here is the gate of heaven.\"

But when Jeroboam there had prepared the golden calf, the prophets would
no longer call the place BethEl (that is, GOD\'s house), but called it
by the name of the neighboring city BethAven, that is, Hans of Sin. For
sin is everything that is done without faith, that is, everything that
is instituted as worship without the Word of GOD or against the Word of
GOD. For it is the word alone whereby all things are sanctified, and
whereby faith is sustained. This opinion of mine is confirmed below in
the 10th chapter \[v. 5. 8.\], where he speaks of the calf at BethAven,
since the prophet clearly indicates at the end of the chapter \[v. 15.\]
that he spoke of BethEl, where Jeroboam wanted the golden calf to be
worshipped. Thus the devil makes BethEl, the house of God, a BethAven, a
house of sin, by having the ungodly perform new services against the
word of God.

In this way, the godless kings turned the places where the patriarchs
sacrificed into places of idolatrous worship. But one should not have
made an example out of what the patriarchs did, since there was a quite
obvious commandment about the place which was designated for the
services. But the examples must be followed only 1) when a commandment
is added to them. Abraham was commanded by God\'s voice to sacrifice his
son. Ahaz did not have this commandment. Therefore, one and the same
work was a right service and a glorious proof of obedience for Abraham
\[Gen. 22:2\], but for Ahaz it was an abominable murder \[2 Kings
16:3\].

In this way, the rich young man in the Gospel \[Matth. 19, 21\] had the
commandment to sell everything and distribute it among the poor. But a
monk acts ungodly who leaves his profession and departs from his goods
and locks himself up in a monastery, for he has no commandment that he
should do so. Therefore, one must adhere to the rule that all God\'s

1\) Instead of äum in the editions will read turn.

The same services were praised in the Fathers, who had a commandment for
them.

What he says about swearing can easily be understood from the foregoing.
For it is not forbidden but commanded to swear, \"As the Lord lives,\"
Deut. 6:13. For it is for the glory of God that we call upon Him as a
witness of the truth, and that we take it for granted that He will look
upon what we do, and that if we do something against our conscience, He
will be an avenger. Therefore, swearing is not evil in itself. But the
children of Israel attached this honor to their idols, because they
meant the God whom they worshipped in Dan, Gilgal, BethEl and other
places where God could not be worshipped, since he had appointed another
place for the worship of God. Therefore, the prophet forbids swearing in
this way, because the honor due to GOtte alone is attributed to idols.

**V. 16: For Israel is running like a mad heifer, and the Lord will feed
her like a lamb in the wilderness.**

This piece also belongs to the admonition that the kingdom of Judah may
be moved by the punishments that follow the idolaters, XXXX XXX means a
cow that does not want to suffer the yoke and is unruly, that cannot be
kept in check. To this he compares the Israelites, for the word of GOD
is the bond with which GOD has tied us, so that we do not deviate from
the truth, and let the lusts of the flesh shoot the reins. This bond, he
says, Israel has broken. For it does not listen to what God reminds it
of through the prophets concerning the right worship; it seeks other
places for its worship and abandons the Temple in Jerusalem.

But what kind of punishment will follow? Certainly this, that it wanders
like a lamb in a desolate place, that is, that it must be among the
heathen without the word and without worship. It is just as if you were
preaching to the papists today: \"Let the Word remind you to stop the
abuses, to offer the whole Sacrament, and to give it to the people.

1200 **D. XXIV, 30S-307.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 4, 16-19.
**W. VI, 1760-1763.** 1201

that you may live in holy matrimony without offense to the churches. But
because you will not heed these exhortations, it will happen that you
will die in these abuses, without sacrament, without the Word, without
Christ. I believe that the prophet uses the simile of the lamb in the
wilderness for this reason, because there can be nothing more miserable
than a lamb without a shepherd. For it is exposed to innumerable
dangers, which it is by no means equipped to drive away. That is why
Christ also uses the parable of the lost lamb when he wants to show the
miserable situation of sinners and his extraordinary kindness towards
them.

But at this point some hope is promised. For although it is certain that
this sheep will be fed in the wilderness and in an inhospitable place,
the comfort is added that the Lord will feed it.

V. 17 **For Ephraim has joined himself to idols; so let him go.**

This is the conclusion of such a long sermon. Because Israel cannot be
turned away from idols, I will leave it to the Gentiles to desolate, as
he also said above \[v. 14.\], \"I will not resist it when your
daughters are defiled.\"

The word \[XXXXX\] by which he here names the idols takes its name from
toil. For the life of idolaters is not only arduous, because they do not
allow themselves leisure or rest, but certain misfortunes follow
idolatry.

V. 18. 19. **They have given themselves over to indulgence and whoredom;
their masters delight in disgracing them. The wind with its wings will
drive them bound, and they must be disgraced over their sacrifice.**

I did not want to translate from word to word at this point. For what
the Hebrew text says: Their wine has stunk, is nothing else than that
they were in shameful

way. However, as it is customary to do at the conclusion, the prophet
repeats the sins of the kingdom of Israel at this point and adds what
punishment will follow.

Idolatry is blissful in the beginning, that is, it acquires great goods
and power, while true religion starves and suffers frost. But how the
idolaters use their goods may be exemplified by the papists. For look 1)
at the monasteries of the canons, the courts of the bishops and
cardinals, and it will become clear to you that the same thing is
happening today that the prophet condemns in the kingdom of Israel, for,
as Moses says \[5th book, chap. 32, 15\]: \"When the servant became fat
and full, he became horny.\"

This godlessness and impurity of the idolaters protects the worldly
authorities. For the kings and princes (whom the prophet calls shields
in this passage according to Ps. 47, 10. because of their office, which
their power should serve) are almost always the patrons of ungodliness
and idolatry. Therefore the prophet says that they delight in dishonor,
that is, in idolatry, which dishonor and disgrace will surely follow at
last; but what will be the end? Certainly such a one, of which Samuel
preaches 1 Sam. 12, 25: XXXXX XXX-XXX

XXXX XXXXX-XX XXX-XX, \"but if you do evil, both you and your king will
be lost\".

The prophet threatens the same here: \"The wind with its wings will
drive them bound,\" that is, the wrath of the Lord will drive you back
and forth like a violent wind and pursue you, and you will be put to
shame with your sacrifices. For the idolatrous services that are
undertaken to avert the wrath of God only provoke God more. Today, the
papists do nothing else with their masses, supplications, and saints\'
services than to hasten their downfall. This is the end of idolatry.

1\) Erlanger: viäi instead of: viäs.

[1202 L. XXIV, 307-309. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1763-1767. 1203]{.underline}

**The fifth chapter.**

**V. 1. Hear this therefore, O ye priests, and take heed, O house of
Israel, and give ear, O house of the king: for a punishment shall come
upon you, who were a snare in Mizpah, and a net stretched out in
Tabor.**

This chapter also contains the punishment of idolatry, and the threat of
certain destruction is added. For God can suffer nothing less than the
contempt of His word, which is a constant companion of idolatry. For
since the word shows the right way to worship God, the idolaters,
setting aside the word, invent for themselves a way to worship God.

But all Scripture teaches that we should first accept the Son of God,
who became the sacrifice for our sins. Then, that we should render to
God the obedience to which the Ten Commandments call us. But what
happens? The Jews neglected this proper worship, and dreamed that even
if they indulged in sins, they would obtain forgiveness of sins through
the sacrifices. Thus, in our country, a monk chooses a new state, he
fasts, he watches, he prays, he dresses in a new way, he says masses,
and hopes that by doing so he will obtain forgiveness of sins.

But if you ask why he has undertaken these services, he will not say
that he is compelled to do so by God\'s word, but he will refer to the
services and examples of the ancients, of which he judges that it is not
evil to imitate them. If you now stop harder and say that the services
performed without the Word are shameful idolatry, then a dispute will
immediately arise, and the hatred of right doctrine and murder will also
be connected with the ungodly services. Therefore, God will be compelled
to judge on both sides, so that the godly will not be oppressed, and so
that the idolatrous will not go unpunished for having departed from the
Word, and for having established new services, with which others will be
as with

The people will be entangled in nets and will not be able to come to the
right knowledge of God.

Furthermore, this punishment is also noteworthy because it shows that
the direction of the ministry requires that sins be punished freely and
that no consideration be given to whether the dignity is violated. 1)
For he does not punish the house of Israel in general, as above, but he
names the priests, likewise the king\'s house, that is, the king himself
and the whole court. These are certain and undoubted punishments of
persons. And it does not move the prophet that there was danger that the
publicly rebuked authorities would be despised and that these words
would be declared seditious. For he is urged to do so by another and
greater danger, namely, that he sees that after the example of the
rulers, the subjects also sin.

Therefore, it is necessary to punish the perpetrators of the offences,
especially if they are in great dignity. But the matter is not without
danger. Therefore, it is surprising that Hosea was not put to death
immediately because of this sermon, because he, who is only an
individual, subjected himself to it, and condemned the people of God,
the priests and even the king, threatening them with ruin, at the time
when the kingdom was seen to be flourishing again. For Jeroboam, as
history shows, ruled the kingdom of Israel with great success.

But the ministers of the word must imitate this right conduct (virtutem)
of the prophet, lest, by treating those who are in dignity and rule too
gently, the simple be led into error, for the common people judge
themselves by the example of the great. Above all, however, we must be
careful not to be too lax in punishing papal abuses. For one must not
worry about the

1\) Instead of rntions \[nlva äiAnitatis in the editions should probably
read ration\" \[nlva\" äignitatis.

1204 D- xxiv. 3os-3n. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 5, 1. 2. W. vi.
ns7-i77o. 1205

This is the judgment of the wise men of the world, who think that one
can keep the pure doctrine if one also translates the errors of the
opponent for the sake of peace. For there is a greater danger in the
aversion which the teachers can remove in no other way than by freely
punishing that in which, as they see, evil is done.

What is written in Hebrew: XXXXX XXX XX,

for judgment is upon you or against you, is the same as when he said,
For the Lord will judge, he will punish, he will afflict you. For this
is how the word \"judge\" is often used in Scripture, as in Paul \[1
Cor. 11:31\], \"If we judged ourselves, we would not be judged by the
Lord,\" that is, the Lord would not punish us. In this way, also in this
passage, the word \"judgment\" is taken in an evil sense and denotes
\"punishments.\" Elsewhere, as above Cap. 2, 19: \"I will trust myself
with thee in judgment,\" it is in a good sense. For this is the other
part of judgment, that after the wicked are subdued, the godly are
saved.

\"Mizpah\" is a mountain in Gilead, on this side of the Jordan.
\"Thabor\" is the famous name of a mountain in Galilee, also on this
side of the Jordan. There is also a city of the Levites of the same name
in the tribe of Zebulun, as the well-known passage 1 Chron. 7, 77.
testifies, that Thabor with its suburbs was given to the children of
Merari.

Jerome, and Lyra, who followed him, rendered the name Mizpah as a
generic name (appellative), namely, a waiting place where, as they say,
ordained by the godless kings, there were men of war who were to watch
and restrain the godly Israelites who adhered to the worship of God in
Jerusalem, as with us the princes and the bishops forbid theirs to hear
our sermons and to partake of Holy Communion with us.

But it is more fitting that we understand it to mean that in these
places of Mizpah and Tabor special services were arranged by the priests
and kings, so that the people would be held back by the outward
appearance of worship, and would not think of the proper services in
Jerusalem. For out of

For this reason he says that these places are nets and ropes, because
they stalk the people with new services, so that their profit would be
the greater. Furthermore, this profanation of the ministry is a very
great sin, for the ministry of preaching is instituted in the church for
the purpose of instructing the hearts, and of rooting them out of error
and wrong opinions. But the priests of Israel turned all their efforts
to the end that they would only entangle the hearts even more in
idolatry and false opinions of God. But that this is the right view is
also proven by the following.

**V. 2: With slaughter they are deepening in their wandering, therefore
I must punish them all.**

In Hebrew it says: XXXXXX XXXX XXXXX,

which is literally translated thus: Deviating they have made the
slaughter deep. But the word XXXXX means almost 1) what we say: to take
root, or to be firm and strong, and well fortified, as Ps. 92:6: \"Your
thoughts are so very deep\", that is, firm, which like a well-founded
building cannot be overturned. In this way we must also take it here
that he says the slaughter is made deep, that is, the sacrifices are so
praised to the people, so fixed with him, that this delusion cannot be
brought out of the hearts of the people. As if we were to say that the
worship of the masses in the papacy is deeply made, that is, it has
taken very deep root, so much so that no human power could have torn
that confidence out of the hearts of men; and yet it is torn out by the
Word.

But it is an enormous disparagement (tapinosis) in the word XXX, that he
calls the service, which Israel held, a slaughter, as if he wanted to
say: Verily, an excellent service! For what do you do other than what
the slaughterers are wont to do daily? In this way God is not
worshipped, but sin should be strangled and lusts should be kept in
check. By this sacrifice, GOD is won when trust in the promised seed is
added. But now,

1\) Erlanger: terre instead of: ters.

[1206 L. xxiv, 3ii-3i3. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
1770-1773. 1207]{.underline}

Since you think that everything you like is free to you, you boast that
you slaughter animals as the highest worship.

It has already been said several times why the prophets punish the
sacrifices commanded by God. For not only did the Israelites sin who
sacrificed in a forbidden place, but also the right sacrifices were
sinful when the opinion was attached to them as if they made righteous.
For righteousness is not found in any work that we do, but in the
sacrifice of the Son of God. Those who despised this sacrifice, that is,
who relied on their sacrifices and works, are condemned everywhere in
Scripture as abusers of God and idolaters. For God does not want to be
worshipped in this way, even though he wanted this to be an exercise of
obedience among his people. He wants a reasonable worship, as Paul calls
it \[Rom. 12, 1\], that is, he wants the hearts to think rightly of God,
to recognize their unworthiness, and to rely on the mercy of God, which
is shown to us in His Son. When this service is performed, the outward
obedience in sacrifices and other works is also pleasing to God.

**V. 3. I know Ephraim well, and Israel is not hidden from me, that
Ephraim is now a harlot, and Israel is unclean.**

This is known from the foregoing, for he punishes the idolatry with
which they defile their minds and all their works.

**V. 4. They do not think to teach themselves to their God, for they
have a harlot spirit in their heart and do not teach of the Lord.**

How so? They spare neither effort nor expense to show everyone that they
are zealous in the worship and service of God. The churches, the
sacrifices, the sermons and other things testify to that. But the
prophet\'s judgment is true, that they do not think of returning to God
and do not strive to know the Lord. Therefore, they are turned away from
God and have no knowledge of God.

Therefore, as he has described above \[Cap. 4, 12 ff.

If he condemned the servile services, he shows here what the right
services are, namely, that one turns to God and knows God, that is,
hears the word and obeys it. Therefore, everything depends on our
hearing the word and obeying it. For then we will not be turned away
from God, will not follow our thoughts, will not invent services for
ourselves, but will persevere in the services that we see are indicated
and commanded by God\'s Word. If the pope had done this, the abomination
of masses, the idolatrous invocation of the saints, and other ungodly
ceremonies would not have been introduced in the church. But because he
did not respect the word and gave room to temptation, superstition grew
immensely. What follows now indicates the penalties of idolatry.

**V.5 Therefore the hope of Israel shall be humbled before their face,
and both Israel and Ephraim shall fall because of their iniquity, and
Judah shall fall with them.**

This is the punishment of idolatry, that they shall be afflicted, and
lose their worship, their kingdom, their goods, and all that they had.
But it is all the more grievous because this has happened to them
because of their sins, as he says, \"They shall fall because of their
iniquity.\" On both sides they shall be afflicted, 1) for the body shall
be afflicted with the adversity of captivity, but the hearts shall be
afflicted with the consciousness of sin. This is the end of ungodliness,
when hearts neglect the word and fall into idolatry.

But the Lord postpones the punishments to give the sinners room for
repentance. For he does not delight in their death; he would rather that
they should be converted and live. Therefore, as a shepherd, he seeks
the erring sheep by the voice of his word; but if they persist and
despise all exhortations, a late but severe punishment seizes them. This
is the certain judgment of all sinners.

1\) In the text: prsmskantur; in the Jenaer at the margin as Conjectur:
xrernevuntur. We have assumed the latter.

1208 **L. XXIV, 313-316.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), Cap. 5, 5-7.
**W. VI, 1773-1776.** 1209

He also mentions Judah here. Because it was, as history shows, a comrade
in idolatry, it also received a share in the punishments. For the
Assyrian plagued the tribe of Judah severely, as can be seen from
Isaiah.

**V. 6 Then they will come with their flocks and herds to seek the Lord,
but they will not find him, for he has turned away from them.**

This is a sorrow that far surpasses that of the flesh. But it is the
real and right punishment for having despised God\'s word. Above \[v.
2\] the prophet said that men deceive themselves with their much
slaughtering, because this is not the right service of God; for how can
God delight or propitiate the slaughtering of cattle? Now, when they are
in the highest and most imminent danger, they again take refuge in the
worship for which they are punished.

This is not the way to reconcile with God. The sins should have been
recognized and forgiven, one should have asked for forgiveness and hoped
for the mercy of God for the sake of the sacrifice of the promised seed.
In this way, God is reconciled, and this is the right repentance through
which access to grace is open. This is how Daniel instructed King
Nebuchadnezzar \[Dan. 4, 24\]. He saw that the punishment was very near,
because he abused his rule for court and tyranny, and neglected the true
service of God. Therefore, he reminds him to remember that he was not
placed in this high position to rule proudly, but to care diligently for
his subjects and serve their needs. For this is the justice or mercy and
good deed of which he preaches. So it will be, he says, if you repent of
your sins, that you will escape the punishment that will surely follow
if you disobey my counsel.

In this way, the Israelites should have recognized their sin of
sacrificing against the Word in forbidden places; they should have
returned to worship in Jerusalem, relying on the mercy of God, not on
their sacrifices. But this they did not do. Therefore, God was angry
with them

the more fiercely they performed their religious services.

Now look at the churches of the pope, and you will see the same thing.
They do not dismiss the masses, not the invocation of the saints, not
the reliance on their merits, but hope that by these, as the highest
divine services, they will drive out the Turk, and lay upon them with
greater zeal than ever before. For now, which they were not in the habit
of doing before, they compel their subjects to this idolatry, and
diligent search is made for those who seem to be somewhat more lax in
the practice of superstition. But who should not recognize that, since
they seek the Lord in this way, they do not find him, but that he has
departed from them? That is why the Turk wages war against them with
such great success.

This is a glorious passage that belongs to the doctrine of repentance,
which is not in outward worship, but in the putting away of sins and
trusting in the mercy of God.

**V. 7: They despise the Lord and beget strange children, so the new
moon will devour them with their inheritance.**

How do those despise the Lord who, as the prophet said, seek the Lord
with their oxen and sheep? For he that despiseth any man seeketh him
not, maketh no expense for him 2c.

But we have said several times that \"to seek the Lord\" is nothing
other than to accept the word, to hear the word, to obey the word, not
to perform other services, not to believe in any other salvation than
that which the word indicates. Thus, to \"despise God\" is to neglect
the Word, to devise services apart from the Word, to rely on other
things than the Word commands.

Therefore, you must look at the word if you want to judge correctly who
in truth cares about God or seeks Him, and who despises God. For he who,
setting aside the word, would take his judgment from the outward
appearance of works, would be mistaken. For we all see how great zeal
for religion was in Ahab, in

1210 **L. xxiv, 3I6-3I8. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
1770-1778.** 1211

Manasseh and similar people. For they do not even spare their children,
to show that they would like to do something pleasing to God and serve
him. But whoever holds these services against the word sees that it is
the utmost idolatry, worthy of eternal fire.

But the prophet makes the sin greater by adding that of the strange
children. For he indicates the trouble that will be given to the
descendants. Because they remain in the footsteps of their ancestors,
they cannot come to the knowledge of the true worship of God. Thus we
see in the adversaries how stubbornly they cling to the examples of the
ancestors. But the same verdict awaits both: \"The new moon will devour
them,\" that is, idolatry will destroy them. For I think that \"new
moon\" is taken here the same way as above \[Cap. 2, 11\]: \"I will put
an end to their new moons\", because I do not approve of the Jews\'
interpretation of the new moon.

**V. 8. 9. Yes, sound the trumpet to Gibeah, yes, sound the trumpet to
Ramah, yes, shout to Bethaven: Behind you, Benjamin! For Ephraim shall
become a desolation in the days when I will punish them.**

Also here (about what others assume here, I leave the judgment to the
reader) seems to me to be a strong admonition that in these high places
this should be proclaimed publicly, that Ephraim at the time when the
Lord will visit it should be devastated, that is, led away captive among
the Gentiles, without any hope of return, so that they do not think that
these threats are vain. For this is what the wicked do, they despise the
judgment of God, and do not think that God will punish so severely;
therefore they are safe. The prophet now wishes that this certainty
could be taken from the hearts, and exhorts, so that it will be known
everywhere that this judgment of the Lord will take place.

**I have faithfully warned the tribes of Israel of this.**

An excellent saying that he says he warned with the utmost diligence
beforehand.

what end it would come to, but in vain. For they kept the idolatry and
despised the threats and the judgment of God. In this way, Germany is
also warned in many ways. Above all, however, the bishops are reminded
of their office, that they should stop the abuses and take care that the
right doctrine is preached. But how many bishops are there who seriously
think about this? Therefore, although they will be attacked by sudden
misfortune in its time, they will not suffer anything that had not been
foretold to them long before. Thus, godlessness remains the same at all
times, that is, obstinate, obdurate and incorrigible.

**V. 10 The princes of Judah are like those who move the border, so I
will pour out my wrath on them like water.**

Because the content of what follows is the same, it is quite rightly
connected with what has gone before. This constant repetition of the
punishments of ungodliness does not seem to be necessary and unpleasant.
But we must remember that these sermons are not preached on one day or
in one place, and that the obduracy of the human mind requires that one
and the same thing be often inculcated, so that some may be brought out
of their error and back onto the right path.

But the prophet uses a new image here, that he compares the princes of
Judah with those who move the borders. For although he indicates the
deviation from the word and the true and ancient religion, he also
punishes with this image the avarice and the greed for profit, which is
constantly found among the idolaters, as also the example of the papists
shows. They would never insist on the masses in this way if the benefit
of the mass, as a certain man 1) used to call it, were not so great. So
they would not defend other human statutes so stubbornly if they did not
bring so much profit.

1\) Jenaer and Erlanger: yuiäam; Wittenberger: \<Mdsru. - Immediately
following is in the Erlanger äkkenäerrmt instead of ützksiutersut.

[1212 L- **XXIV, 318-320.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 5, 10-12.
**w. VI, I778-I78I.** 1213]{.underline}

Now the kingdom of Judah, after the apostasy of the kingdom of Israel,
held fast for a time to the pure doctrine and the right services, but at
last the priests of Judah, seduced by the example and lured by the
richer gain, yes, even the princes, embraced idolatry. But as no one
moves the boundaries without sin, so also the corruption and the
falsification of the old and true religion brings with it the certain
punishment. Therefore the Lord threatens that he will pour out his wrath
like water. For the water not only flows in a straight course, but also
pours over the shore on both sides. Thus, the LORD threatens, he will
let his wrath rage, and history shows how Sanherib devastated the
kingdom of Judah far and wide, even to Jerusalem.

**V. 11 Ephraim suffers violence and is afflicted (et judicio
conteritur); it serves him right, because he gave himself at the
commandment of men.**

This is taken from the devastation of the kingdom of Israel, because it
was more severely afflicted than the kingdom of Judah. The enemy, the
Assyrian, did violence to it, but could not have done so at all if
Israel had not first been destroyed by the judgment of the Lord. For
\"judgment\" here means the punishment imposed by the judge for the sake
of sin. For in judgment both things tend to happen, the wicked are
punished and the good are avenged, hence the Hebrews take the word in
both senses. But as he accused the princes of Judah of transgressing the
boundaries, so he accuses the kingdom of Israel of having obeyed the
commandment of its kings, for this is what the word XX means.

But, you will say, is it not a virtue for subjects to obey the command
of their authorities? Why then does the Prophet make this an offense and
threaten this obedience with punishment? I answer: The authorities must
be obeyed in civil matters and in what (as one is wont to say) belongs
before their forum. If, however, the authorities leave their territory
(forum)

goes out and encroaches into the territory 1) of GOD, and wants to
command what is forbidden by the word of GOD: if anyone obeys here, he
sins. For one must acknowledge and obey the commandment of the higher
LORD, as Peter says \[Apost. 5, 29.\]: \"One must obey GOD more than
men.\"

Today, Germany is also beset by this sin. For not only the bishops force
their own to idolatry, but the princes do the same. And we usually judge
that this sin of the rulers will harm themselves, not the subjects. But
listen here to the prophet, who expressly says that Israel shall be
punished because it has kept the commandments of its kings.

What should have been done now? Should the kings have been deprived of
their rule or should violence have been used against them? No, but they
should not have been obeyed, because they gave orders in an unjust way,
and rather they should have suffered the utmost, as the example of
Daniel and his comrades shows \[Dan. 3, 18\]. In this way, the subjects
should not obey their bishops and princes who hold to idolatry and want
to force their own to the same, for God\'s command is greater than that
of a man, and there is also a greater reward for this obedience. For
this man of his leaves our body unharmed only for a short time, but that
\[God\] preserves body and soul eternally.

**V. 12. I am a moth to Ephraim, and a maggot to the house of Judah.**

Here he explains what kind of power this is and who is the judge who has
crushed Israel, namely the Lord himself. And he uses magnificent images.

For there is nothing softer than a moth, for it cannot stand the touch,
and yet it gnaws through a garment every now and then, so that it is
quite useless for clothing.

XXX is a very small worm. If I am not mistaken, it is called teredo in
Latin, but it also gnaws large trees.

1\) Instead of torinn in the outputs we have assumed toruna.

[1214 L. xxiv, 320 f. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, 1781-178
pp. 1215]{.underline}

Thus the wrath of the Lord is most hopelessly despised by the wicked, as
if it were void and powerless like a moth or a maggot, and yet what it
has seized gradually perishes and cannot be restored in any way.

Therefore, these sermons serve to instruct us so that we may not be
safe, but fear the Lord and walk in His ways. Otherwise, no strength, no
power can protect us, as we see that the smallest worms gnaw the hardest
oaks, that they rot and fall to the ground. What follows now shows what
kind of heart the hypocrites have in dangers.

**V.13. When Ephraim felt his sickness and Judah his wounds, Ephraim
went to Assyria and sent to the king of Jareb, but he could not help you
or heal your wounds.**

Above \[v. 6\] he said that in perils the idolaters do not diminish
their idolatry in anything, but only practice it more fiercely, whereas
true repentance requires that we rest on the word, and accept the
services that are presented and commanded to us in the word, but reject
those that are prepared without the word. Therefore, this is the first
thing in which idolaters sin. Then, as the prophet indicates here, they
also sin in this: they should have sustained themselves by hoping in the
mercy and help of God, but they do not have this hope at all, and take
refuge in the hope of the help that the riches and power of the world
show them. Thus Ephraim, when the neighboring Syrians were oppressing
Israel, joined forces with the Assyrians and bought their help with a
large amount of money. Later, when disaster threatened the Assyrians, it
joined forces with Jareb, just as Judah had sought help from the
Egyptians.

sought. For although it is not known who the king of Jareb is, it is
clear that this reliance on human help will be punished.

Therefore, this piece also serves to instruct us about the right
repentance, that we should first put away idolatry and rest on the Word.
Then, that we place our hope in God, who forgives sins and mitigates the
punishments of those who refrain from sinning. But those who do not want
this form of repentance, and maintain idolatry, like the Papists, hasten
their ruin, and of those who take recourse to human help, the prophet
says: \"They have not been able to heal your wounds.\" Why is that?

V. 14. **For I am as a lion to Ephraim, and as a young lion to the house
of Judah. I, I tear them apart and go away and no one can save them.**

. Not the Assyrian devastated the kingdom of Israel, not the Babylonian
devastated the kingdom or the house of Judah, but the Lord himself. As
soon as he has begun to rage, he is in truth like a lion from whom that
which he has seized cannot be snatched. Nowadays we should think that
this is the reason why the Turk fights against us with such great
success. For since we have united ourselves with the Lord and have not
made Him our enemy through our sins, the ungodly enemy would also be
punished for his unworthy undertakings. But now that we are ripe for
punishment, he succeeds in his ungodly schemes.

The repetition of the intercession \[\"I\"\] serves to depress the
certainty of the idolaters. For they think that they are loved by God
because of the services they perform, but the Lord testifies that He
hates them.

1216 L. **XXIV, 322 f.** Interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 5, 15. **W.
VI, 1785-1788.** 12 1 7

**The sixth chapter.**

Cap. 5, 15. **Again I will go to my place until they recognize their
guilt (donec abjiciant peccatum**), **and seek my face, if it is bad for
them, they will have to seek me early (and say):**

Here begins a new sermon about the kingdom of Christ, by which the
prophet comforts the godly, so that they will not lose heart because of
the tribulations that 1) lay ahead of them. For this is what the
prophets do: when they see that the greater part of the people will
surely continue in sin and accumulate wrath, they turn to the godly,
from whom they see that they must also suffer the common punishments, so
that they should learn to soothe their pain, which the common misery has
brought about, through the hope of the future grace through Christ. But
this passage is especially wonderful, for it teaches about the most
important things, about the counsel according to which God smites His
own, about true repentance, about faith, about the resurrection of
Christ and its benefits, and about the whole ministry of the gospel, how
it is constituted, and what fruits it will bring. Therefore, one must
not pass over it carelessly.

By nature, when we are punished, we judge that God is angry with us. And
it is true that God hates sin, and that is why He imposes punishments.
But the Word shows a vast difference between the wrath of God and the
wrath of men. When men are angry, you will hope in vain for a benefit
from them. Therefore Christ, when he interprets the fifth commandment,
says quite clearly \[Matth. 5, 22\] that he who is angry with his
brother is a murderer. But God\'s wrath is a wrath of judgment. For
though he hates and punishes sin, he does not hate the person. For He
loves the world, as Christ Himself teaches, John 3:16, and Paul says
\[Romans 5:8\] that we were loved by God at the time when we were

1\) Erlanger: Instead of:

nor were enemies. Therefore, the wrath of God is connected with love,
that is, with the effort to preserve people and make them blessed.

This is not the nature of man\'s anger, because it is connected with the
desire to harm, and it completely extinguishes love. And yet God wanted
to leave a kind of characteristic of his wrath, which is a wrath of
love, in nature. Therefore Solomon uses a simile that is taken from men,
since he says \[Proverbs 13:24\]: \"A father who loves his son chastises
him.\" For here we see both that the father hates sin, and yet loves the
person who has sinned. And this very love, which is to be wondered at,
is a cause of wrath. For if the Father did not love the Son, he would
let him follow his vents with impunity. But because he sees that this
would bring ruin to the son, he resists his lusts through strict
discipline and beatings.

The prophet explains this counsel of God very well. For it was a
terrible example of wrath that the whole people of Israel was cast out
among the Gentiles and left there, not only in constant servitude, but
also in blindness and without knowledge of God. Although Judah\'s
situation was better (for, as he will say below \[v. 11\], it was
preserved for the promised harvest), it was still kept hard because,
after the temple and the whole kingdom had been laid waste, it had to
dwell captive among the Gentiles for a whole seventy years. Therefore
the people was as it were without God, because the Lord, as he threatens
here, went to his place, that is, he left the idolatrous ones to the
Gentiles for chastisement and did not defend them against the Gentiles.
But for what purpose did he do this? Of course, so that they would
recognize their sin and seek the face of the Lord, that is, so that they
would accept the Word and the divine services that are presented in the
Word. For this is actually God\'s face, through which He reveals Himself
and makes Himself visible to us, as it were.

1218 D. XXIV. 323-326. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1788-1791. 1219

The Word and the outward services that are commanded by the Word.

But, you will say, the lodge could happen in another, less harsh way,
and which rhymed better with the mercy of God. I answer: it could not
happen in any other way. For this we learn by experience, that the
idolatrous, so long as they prosper, are incorrigible. For as Hosea
testified above \[Cap. 2, 12\], they attributed the very prosperity they
enjoyed to idolatry, and therefore indulged in it all the more.

Therefore, although God could have used milder means, the depravity of
men does not permit them. For what milder way can there be than to
admonish sinners through the word that they should repent of sins and
avoid the causes of punishment? But God does not judge in this way.
Therefore, they must be chastised, and so severely that they no longer
retain the ability to practice their idolatry. For as long as the
adversaries of our religion either live in peace or are frightened by
rumors of war in the distance, they do not put an end to their idolatry.
Therefore, the Turk lies heavier on our necks from day to day until God
also takes away their ability to practice their idolatry.

But blessed are those who understand the counsel of God in this way. For
these go on the right path to repentance, that is, they recognize their
sins, for whose sake, as they know, the wrath of God has come, and
repent of them. Then they seek the Lord\'s face, that is, they do
nothing or do nothing against the Word or without the Word, and begin to
trust in the Lord\'s mercy, that as he has smitten, so he will also be
merciful and heal. But the hearts that are thus instructed are content
with the will of God. For they comfort themselves with confidence in the
mercy of God, and with hope in the good things to come they overcome the
present adversity, from which springs true patience and willing
obedience.

The word XXXXX is interpreted in many ways, but it means, like XXXX,
sin.

and the guilt offering for sin; so the verb means both sinning and
atoning for sin by sacrifice. Therefore, the prophet indicates not only
the part of repentance by which we recognize sin, but also the faith by
which we take hold of the sacrifice of Christ offered for sin and are
cleansed from sins. For then we sacrifice for sin when we appropriate
Christ\'s sacrifice by faith. Therefore, I have wanted to translate the
word XXX: to cast away or put away sin, because in this way we sum up
both the sacrifice of Christ, through which the Son of God has taken
away our sins, and the correction, which is always connected with faith.

Therefore, just as no one who is afflicted with a dangerous disease
should be disgusted by the physician and the medicine, for the physician
is to be honored for the sake of the need, so too, because affliction is
the medicine of the soul, by which we are brought to the knowledge of
sin, and driven to seek a reliable remedy for sin, we must not hate
affliction, not lament after the manner of women, but give thanks to God
who has afflicted us, not in anger, though there is anger, but in grace.
For he wratheth, that we should not continue in sins, but be converted
and saved. If he were without this wrath, we would perish in sins. For
this is the most grievous wrath, when the Lord does not punish sins, but
lets men be carried away by their lusts, as he said above in the fourth
chapter, v. 14, about the fornicating daughters. For the temptation
gives understanding and teaches to remember the word \[Is. 28, 19.\], as
he says here: \"When it is evil for them, they will seek me early.\" But
the meaning of the word is known, that it expresses a fierce zeal and
haste.

Cap. 6, 1. **Come, let us return to the Lord; for He has torn us
asunder, He will also heal us; He has smitten us, He will also bind us
up.**

This also belongs to the description of true repentance. For he who says
he will go to the Lord

[1220 **L. XXIV, 326-328.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 6, 1. 2.
**W. VI. I7SI-I7S4.** 1221]{.underline}

who confesses that he has departed from the Lord. Therefore, the church,
gathered from the remnants of Israel, condemns with one word all the
services and sacrifices it has used until now.

But how does one return to the Lord? Certainly in such a way that one
does not follow one\'s thoughts, not the commandments of one\'s rulers,
not the examples of one\'s neighbors, but the word itself, and keeps the
divine services that are commanded in the word. Above \[Cap. 5, 2. 3.\],
however, we have shown what the proper worship services are, namely
obedience to the law with confession of sin; then faith, which takes
hold of the sacrificial Lamb Christ, and firmly holds that we are
justified and reconciled to God through His merit. Although there is a
great diversity of offices in the outward way of life, these are also to
be related to the holy ten commandments, and each one should consider
that he has served God when he serves his profession.

Therefore, these words not only include the confession of past sins,
that he says the church will turn back to the Lord, but they also show a
glorious trust in mercy and help. For no one takes refuge in danger in
him from whom he fears evil. That is why the church adds: \"He has torn
us apart, but he will also heal us; he has wounded us, but he will also
bind up the wounds\" or heal by applying 1) plaster; because that is
what the word XXX means. But the prophet could not have indicated the
trust in mercy more emphatically. For this is what we do by nature: we
hate or flee the one from whom we have received punishment or from whom
we fear punishment.

Therefore, the fact that the church, gathered from the remnants of
Israel, after the punishments suffered, still has the confidence that
God will bring it help and heal the wounds, is a sign of a very special
confidence, of which we have a similarity with well-behaved children.
For the constant contact with the parents keeps them in their attachment
in such a way that even after they have received punishment they will
not

1\) Erlanger: imxositio instead of: Imxokito.

They cease to love their parents, but go out to them and hope for the
usual good deeds from them. We see, however, that the cause of this
inclination in children does not lie in nature, but in the fact that
they have experienced their parents\' kindness in their long intercourse
with them.

But this passage also serves to teach us to judge the visitations
correctly, that the Lord does not impose punishments in order to reject
and condemn us completely, but so that He may remind us of our sin and
provoke us to repentance, and then heal us again and have mercy on us.

Manasseh was treated miserably in the exile, but if he had been without
this plague, he would never have desisted from persecuting the true
church and insisting on idolatrous worship. But after being afflicted
with punishments, he is reminded of his sin, and deceives sorrow over
sin, but in such a way that in the midst of feeling wrath he holds fast
the hope of mercy. Now this is a glorious virtue that does not come from
flesh and blood, but from the word by which the Holy Spirit enkindles
hearts so that they firmly believe that even when God is angry and
punishes, He is merciful and wants us to be well. Neither Cain nor Saul
saw this, so they ran blindly to their doom, having thrown away the hope
of forgiveness.

Therefore, this passage should be carefully remembered, because it
describes repentance so beautifully, and connects with the feeling of
anger the trust in mercy.

**V. 2. He makes us alive after two days, he will raise us up on the
third day so that we will live before him.**

Jerome cites the Jews\' opinion of the three days. But what can we
expect healthy from those in the interpretation of the prophets, who
deny the prophets completely, if one presses them a little harder?
Therefore, whoever wants to take pleasure in their inconsistencies and
sought-after subtleties, I believe that they are not worth even looking
at when we interpret the holy scriptures.

Therefore, let the reader here first of all the words

[1222 L. XXIV, 328-330. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1794-1797. 1223]{.underline}

of the prophet carefully consider. \"He maketh us alive,\" he says,
therefore they are dead before; and he adds the time, \"He maketh us
alive after two days, and the third day he will raise us up.\" How or
why? Certainly, \"that we may live before him,\" that is, in the life in
which he himself lives.

If this is well considered, it proves that the prophet speaks expressly
of the resurrection of Christ, and that this is the passage to which
Paul aims, when he says 1 Cor. 15:4, \"He is risen the third day,
according to the Scriptures.\" For emphasis cannot be laid solely on the
fact that he says \"after two days\" and \"on the third day,\" but that
he adds: \"The LORD will make us alive,\" and, \"We shall live before
him.\" This cannot but be referred to the resurrection of our flesh and
to eternal life.

But, you will say, he is not speaking of Christ\'s resurrection or his
return to eternal life, but of ours, for he says, \"He will make us
alive after two days. \"2c. I answer, This very thing must be
particularly noted. For in this way he indicates the fruit of Christ\'s
resurrection. For it is Christ alone who was made alive after two days,
and on the third day rose from the dead. But the prophet indicates that
the fruit of the resurrection also belongs to us. Therefore he makes
Christ\'s life our life, and his resurrection our resurrection, just as
the apostles do. Paul says Col. 3, 3. that we have died and our life is
hidden with Christ in God. In the 15th chapter of the First Epistle to
the Corinthians he says, v. 12: \"But if Christ is preached that he rose
from the dead, how do some of you say that the resurrection of the dead
is nothing?\" Likewise, vv. 20-22: \"But now is Christ risen from the
dead, and become the firstfruits of them that sleep. Since through One
Man comes death, and through One Man comes the resurrection of the dead.
For as in Adam they all die, so in Christ they shall all be made
alive.\" These sayings show that the fruit of Christ\'s resurrection is
that we too shall rise and live.

Therefore the prophet rightly changes the persons. For it should have
been said: Christ shall be made alive after two days, and shall rise
again the third day, as Peter saith \[1 Ep. 3:18.\], \"Made alive
according to the Spirit.\" For so it came to pass that Christ rose again
the third day. But the prophet says that after two days we shall be made
alive again, and on the third day, when Christ rose again, we shall rise
again, and that for this reason: because we were sunk into death by sin,
and should have remained continually in death, the Son 1) of God took
our sins upon Himself, and was sufficient for them on the cross. And
afterwards, when he rose again, he overcame the death he had suffered
for us. Therefore, at the time Christ rose from the dead, we began to
rise and live, for through Him our death was conquered and the life we
had lost was restored to us.

But we should diligently endeavor to appropriate the resurrection of
Christ in this way, so that when you hear that Christ is risen on the
third day, you may be sure that you are risen at the same time with him,
as indeed it is, though it has not yet been revealed. For this reason
Paul calls Christ the firstfruits of those who sleep, because he was the
first to raise himself from death to life, and we will follow him. And
he says \[1 Cor. 15, 55. ff.\] that victory over death and sin has been
given to us by God through Christ.

But it is not necessary to anxiously inquire why the prophet did not
content himself with saying, \"He will raise us up on the third day,\"
but also added that of the two days: \"He will make us alive after two
days.\" For though it might be said that \"on the third day\" and
\"after two days\" are the same thing, or at least that the two days are
included in the third day, yet nothing prevents it, because these two
articles of our faith are distinct 2): \"He descended to the

1\) Erlanger: ülios instead of: ülius.

2\) Erlanger: ässtinoti instead of: äistinot!.

1224 **XXIV, 330-332.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 6, 2. 3. **W.
VI, I797-I8W.** 1225

Hell\" and \"he rose on the third day\" to refer what he says about the
two days to the descent to hell. Because one must believe that this
descent was something else than that he is buried.

And it seems that Peter interprets this descent, since he says 1 Petr.
3, 18. ff. that Christ died for our sins, the righteous for the
unrighteous, so that he might bring us to God, and was indeed killed
according to the flesh, but made alive according to the spirit. In the
same way he preached to those who were in prison when he came in the
Spirit, who had once been unbelievers, waiting for God\'s patience in
the days of Noah, when they were preparing the ark. 1) Here Peter
clearly says that Christ not only appeared to the dead fathers and
patriarchs, some of whom Christ, when he rose from the dead, undoubtedly
raised to eternal life with him, but also preached to some who did not
believe in the time of Noah and were waiting for God\'s patience, that
is, who hoped that God would not deal so harshly with all flesh, so that
they would know that their sins had been forgiven through the sacrifice
of Christ. Therefore, in this passage the prophet includes the church of
all times, that is, not only the one that was under the law and
according to the law, but also the one that existed before the flood.

That he says, \"We shall live XXXX, before his face,\" though some draw
upon the life of the godly in this temporality, yet it certainly
includes the eternal life which we begin to possess by faith while we
live here, as John says \[1 Ep. 3:2:\] \'\^We are now children of GOD,
but it has not yet appeared, but when it shall appear, we shall be as He
is.\"

**V. 3. Then we will be careful and diligent to know the Lord.**

> Known is the meaning, which is in the word, because it comprehends in
> itself the knowledge

1\) This biblical text found in our original agrees verbatim with that
of the Latin translation of the Bible attributed to Luther. Compare
Walch, old edition, Vol. XIV, 1159 f.

God and the ministry of the Word, through which the right knowledge is
propagated. Therefore, this passage belongs to the time of the revealed
Gospel after Christ\'s resurrection, when both the Holy Spirit was given
to the apostles and, through their ministry, the knowledge of God, that
is, the good deed of Christ, was spread to all parts of the world. For
at that time the hearts, inflamed by the Holy Spirit, received the word
with great desire, as the Acts of the Apostles show.

But here notice the name \"Jehovah\" \[in Hebrew\], because it says that
people will only know the Lord when the teaching of Christ will be
spread in the world. Has there been no knowledge of God in the world
before that? But this saying belongs to the passages of the Gospel
\[Matth. 11, 27.\]: \"No one knows the Father, except the Son.\"
Likewise \[John 14:9\], \"He that seeth me seeth the Father.\" For
although nature has some knowledge of God, which, as Paul says \[Rom.
1:20\], it takes from the visible things of the world, yet this
knowledge is very small, and is easily shaken off. But he who knows
Christ, that he is the Son of God, sent by God the Father to save
sinners, knows God in the right way, that he is merciful, kind, gentle
and friendly, that he loves the world, not hates it, that he desires to
save sinners, not to destroy them. This knowledge of God is brought
forth only through the knowledge of Christ, that is, through the gospel.
Therefore, the poor multitude of sinners, terrified by the fear of
God\'s judgment, as the prophet says here, follow this teaching with
great diligence and effort, so that they may know God in this way.

**For he will \"break forth\" like the beautiful dawn (Quasi aurora
firmatus est egressus ejus).**

This refers to the ministry of the Word and the teaching of the Gospel.
For this is why the prophet uses the simile of the dawn, that he might
show this light of the Word, which is the knowledge of the Lord spread
over the whole world.

1226 L. XXIV, W2-S34. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, I8M-I8V3.
1227

the one. And I have no doubt that the prophet followed the prophecy of
David Ps. 19, 7. in this place, where he compares the teaching of the
Gospel to the sun. He says: \"It rises at one end of heaven, and returns
to the same end; and nothing is hidden from its heat.\" But because our
prophet prophesies of the beginnings and, as it were, of the cradle of
the gospel, the similitude of the dawn was more fitting than that of the
sun. For this, as it shows itself to the world from afar, gradually
increases so that the outgoing sun illuminates the whole world with its
light.

Then this similitude must also be applied to teach us what the world is
if it does not have the teaching of the gospel. It is instructed in the
knowledge of the law, has dominions and kingdoms; these are maintained
and fortified by laws, discipline, respectability, also by lawful
punishments. And it cannot be denied that these are great and glorious
gifts. But if the knowledge of the gospel is not added to these, then in
truth the world errs, as it were, in dark night. For it lacks the
knowledge of God, which alone not only adorns the other gifts and makes
them complete, but also shows people the right and beneficial use of
them, so that they apply them for God\'s glory and the salvation of
their neighbor. The world does not see this use of the gifts because it
lacks the knowledge of the Gospel. Therefore, it thinks that it must use
them for its own glory and benefit, but since it abuses the gifts in
this way, it is unfortunate and will be punished in many ways.

But what is the word XXXX used for? We have translated it: firmatus est
\[he has been fixed\]; others translate: to be prepared. And it is true,
it means to be prepared, but in such a way that it is fixed and well
founded, and cannot be overturned or hindered. In this way the prophet
says here of Christ and the Gospel, in which Christ\'s good deed is
presented: His exit is prepared. For as no one can hinder the rising of
the dawn, nor veil its light, that it may not be seen

could, it indicates that the ministry of the gospel cannot be hindered
or suppressed, although Satan and the world should undertake it with
greater effort. Hence this saying agrees with the words of Christ
\[Matt. 16:18.\], \"The gates of hell shall not prevail against it.\"
The reason is: because the exit of this king is so prepared and fixed by
the gospel as that of the dawn, which cannot be hindered, but gradually
pours out ever brighter upon the world.

Therefore, this saying contains a wonderful consolation, which we should
especially take into our hearts at this time. For when you look at the
raging of the adversaries, their power and constant striving to harm,
combined with the greatest cunning; when you then look at our churches,
how great weakness is everywhere, how great a multitude of aversions,
how great a lack of teachers, how dangerous negligence among princes and
rulers: Tell me, will you not think that the gospel is like a lamp that
only spreads a dark light, which seems to be extinguished by a single
breath, and not a strong one at that?

Therefore, the godly are afraid when they see the many dangers. But the
prophet comforts us that it will come to pass that, just as he who would
endeavor to suppress the rising of the dawn would labor in vain, so also
the light of the gospel will increase greatly, and cannot be hindered or
suppressed. For its coming forth is fixed, so that it cannot be
hindered. Thus Simeon \[Luc. 2, 30. 31.\] used the same image in his
song, when he calls Christ the Savior, who is prepared before all
nations, that is, firmly established, fortified.

**And will come to us like a rain, like a late rain that moistens the
land.**

This is the other consolation: that just as the word cannot be hindered,
so also it will bear certain fruit. For this is the net which Christ
desired the apostles and teachers to cast into the world, as it were
into a sea, to catch men for salvation. For

1228 **334-336.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 6, 3. 4. w. **VI.
1863-1806.** 1229

This is the reason why the prophet compares the gospel to the rain,
namely to the late rain that restores the seed, which has almost
withered due to the persistent heat of the sun, towards the time of
harvest, so that it can increase.

**V. 4. How will I do you good, Ephraim! How will I do you good, Judah!
For the grace that I will show you will be like the dew of the morning,
and like the dew that spreads early in the morning.**

The prophet said of the New Testament times that deliverance from death
and eternal life would be preached through the resurrection of Christ,
and then people would know God rightly. For they will not fear Him, as
those to whom He is not known in the right way must fear Him, but will
be of good cheer in His mercy. Although the synagogue and the Gentiles
oppose this teaching, he nevertheless says that it will come to pass
that, just as the dawn cannot be prevented, but enlightens the world
more and more, and not without very great fruit, so also the course and
fruit of the word cannot be prevented. This is what the prophet has said
so far about Christ\'s kingdom. Now he goes on to describe these
benefits.

\"How will I do you good, Ephraim! How will I do you good, Judah!\" as
if he wanted to compare this with the benefits shown to the ancient
people. It was a great thing that they were freed from the servitude of
Egypt, that they were graced with glorious victories over the nations,
that they possessed the land promised to the fathers. But these were all
temporal things, and only helped those who lived at that time. But the
New Testament brings us spiritual and eternal goods, namely
reconciliation with God, forgiveness of sins, the Holy Spirit and
eternal life.

Therefore, the prophet adds, \"Your grace will be like a cloud of dew in
the morning.\" Here the interpreters have erred, not only because of the
ambiguity, but also because of the nature of the parable. For almost all
the newer ones take \"grace\" or mercy in an active way (active) for
grace, with

The Jews are compared to the dew, because they suddenly turned away from
it to godlessness and sins. Jerome takes it in suffering consecration
(passive), but he also understands the nature of the parable, that the
grace with which the Lord had stood by them would quickly cease, because
they were to be led into captivity by the Assyrians and Babylonians 2c.

But I do not approve of either view. It is true that mercy or grace is
taken in a suffering way, from the grace that God wants to show to this
people, but the prophet does not use the simile of the dew because it
disappears quickly, but rather has in mind that through the dew the
earth is refreshed. For when it is very hot, the nights are so warm that
the people are weakened by it. But when the dawn is about to break,
cooler breezes arise, and descending clouds of dew dampen the heat and
refresh the earth. Just as the bodies suffering and languishing from the
heat are refreshed when they drink a cool drink and regain their lost
vigor, so also the earth is refreshed, the languishing plants are
refreshed, regain their strength, as it were, and straighten up when
they drink the morning dew.

But what is this heat in people? Nothing else than the feeling of sin,
the wrath of God and the eternal punishments. For when these take hold
of the heart, one must almost give up one\'s life over them, as this
temptation is described so wonderfully in the 38th Psalm, v. 2 ff:
\"Lord, do not punish me in your anger, and do not chastise me in your
wrath. For your arrows are in me, and your hand is upon me. There is
nothing sound in my body before thy wrath, and there is no peace in my
bones before my sin. For my sins are upon my head, like a heavy burden
they have become too heavy for me. I walk crookedly and very stooped;
all day long I walk sadly. For my loins are all withered, and there is
nothing wholesome in my body. It is quite different with me, and I am
very crushed. I howl with the disquietness of my heart. Lord, before you
is all my sorrow.

1230 L. XXIV. 336-338. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1806-1809. 1231

greed, and my groaning is not hidden from you. My heart trembles, my
strength has left me, and the light of my eyes is not with me.\"

In these pains and dangers, nothing raises the hearts that have grown
weary and almost died but the teaching of the Gospel, which teaches that
Christ has taken our sins upon Himself, has done enough for us, and has
opened for us the way to life through His death. When hearts hear this,
they draw hope of forgiveness and, like almost dead flowers, return to
their former freshness and splendor.

And this is the real benefit of the gospel. For when the law is applied,
it only increases these terrors and makes sin greater. How great,
therefore, is the folly of those who do not lead hearts that are
terrified by the sight of their sins to this fresh water, but tell them
to seek help from their works and be content with the teaching of the
law! These heap plague upon plague, and indeed, like the Egyptians, give
them twofold trouble in burning the bricks \[Ex. 5:6 ff\]. For not by
the works of the law, but by faith in Christ comes righteousness; and
not the law, but the gospel is the power of God, which makes blessed all
who believe in it \[Rom. 3:28, 1:16\]. 1 Who could doubt that Paul drew
these sayings from these sermons of the prophets?

**V. 5. Therefore I court them by the prophets, and kill them by my
mouth, that thy judgment may come to light.**

Nothing else makes the reading of the prophets so obscure than that they
give only a few short announcements of their sermons and for this reason
often make use of sudden transitions. Whoever does not pay careful
attention to these must inevitably go wrong. And to read the prophets,
knowledge of grammar as well as the light of the spirit is not
necessary. Therefore you can see everywhere that what is said about the
kingdom of Christ is transferred to the ancient people, as all
interpreters have done in the previous verse, while it is certain that
the prophet speaks of the kingdom of Christ.

had spoken. Sometimes careless interpreters draw what is said about the
people living at that time to the time of the New Testament.

The prophet has made such a sudden transition also here, because this
passage does not refer to the preceding, but to the then existing
people, to whom Hosea preached. But there is a good connection, because
the prophet answers tacitly to an objection. Because God wanted to give
the people of the New Testament such great riches of His goodness and
mercy, the people of the Law seemed to be wronged, since they lacked
these gifts. But, says the prophet, you are not wronged, for God sends
His prophets. The word of them is as it were a plane, that it may cut
off the vices, 1) by threatening the sinners with punishment, and by
indicating the right knowledge of God and the right services of God.

This is a very beautiful description of the ministry of preaching, which
has been in the church at all times. For it is likened to a plane, not
only because by the ministry of the word that which is defective is cut
off, but man is renewed and born again, so that he who before was ugly
to look at, like a rough and gnarled wood, and unsuited to the work of
God, now, as it were smoothed and polished, presents himself to God to
be formed, permitted, and made ready for holy use.

However, it has often been said that the teaching in the Church is
twofold. The law indicates what God demands of us and at the same time
holds the punishments against the transgressors. Therefore Paul calls
the office of the law \[2 Cor. 3, 6. f.\] an office of death, not only
because it is not useful for life, but because the law, since death
itself is presented to sinners as the punishment of sin, convicts us of
sin and kills us. That is, it convicts us that we are guilty of death,
and at the same time warns us that we should not heap upon ourselves the
punishments and wrath of God, but abstain from those things for which
the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience \[Eph. 5:6\].

1\) Erlanger: praectiaat instead of: praeaiäat.

1232 **L. XXIV, 338-340.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 6, 5. **W.
VI, 1809-1812.** 1233

This part of the teaching is indicated by the prophet when he says: \"I
killed them by my mouth. But this part of the teaching is necessary for
the churches. For those who do not see their sins are secure and despise
grace, and never come to right repentance, as the examples of the
Pharisees show. But those who are terrified by the wrath of God not only
fear God and guard against sins, but also look around for a remedy
against sins. Therefore, one must not tolerate those who think that the
teaching of the law should be removed from the church, because this
plane is necessary for the rough and gnarled blocks.

The other part of the teaching is the word of the Gospel, through which
the frightened hearts are restored. For they hear that God does not want
to reject sinners. God hates sin and threatens it with punishment, but
for this reason He does not want sinners to be lost, because He sends
His Son as the sacrificial lamb to redeem them, who shall be sufficient
for sins through His death. When this will of God is recognized in
Christ, the hearts are straightened and attain a new light. They are no
longer afraid, they do not flee from God, but, filled with hope through
Christ, they take refuge in His grace, because they see that He has such
great care for them that He has not spared His only begotten Son.
Therefore the prophet compares the gospel to the rising sun, which with
its light brings new life to the world, which is shrouded in the
darkness of night.

He calls it \[the gospel but with a special name \"the right\"
(judicia - judgment), as also Christ Joh. 16, 8. says: the Holy Spirit
will punish the world sum the judgment\]. 1) Therefore these two
teachings, which are different from each other, must be constantly
connected, so that first the hearts are killed by the preaching of the
law, but then again made alive by the light of the gospel. For only in
this way is that which is corrupt in us properly cut off, and we are
born again to a new and spiritual life. For through the word

1\) Added by us.

of the law, the old man is killed, security is cast out and the fear of
God is implanted in the hearts. But through the Gospel, the new man is
born, for the Spirit enkindles and purifies hearts through it.

Therefore, I have said that in this passage is a description of the
preaching ministry that is in the church; that is compared to a plane.
And the teachers of the church, in truth, do nothing else when they
perform their office, but plane men like rough and gnarled blocks, and
cut off the unevenness. For just as a tree that has grown out of the
ground is not fit for any use, but only after the branches have been cut
off, the bark peeled off, and first smoothed with an axe, and then with
planes or other tools, can it be put to various uses: so we see that in
men there is much that is defective, which must be cut off by the Word.
Avarice is an unshaped branch. Now if a teacher in the church teaches
that one must flee this one, if he indicates the punishments that are
threatened to the miserly, he will find somewhere one who will have
remorse and sorrow for having committed this sin, and will henceforth
guard against it. For the word will not return empty to the one who sent
it. It is the same with the other vices, when a diligent planer comes
over them.

It should be noted, however, that he does not say that it is the
prophets who plane the gnarled trees, that is, who call sinners to
repentance, but GOD Himself. \"I,\" he says, \"court them through the
prophets.\" For he wants to teach us that we should not be angry with
the teachers when they punish what deserves punishment, but receive
their words as the word of GOD. For it is in truth in this way that GOD
seeks the blessedness of sinners, so that they may not surely continue
in sins and be condemned. Now if we could include this image in our
hearts, that we are like a log unshaped by many knots, we would never
cease to give thanks to GOD, who so fatherly reminds us and shapes us by
His word, so that we may abide in His kingdom.

1234 L. XXIV. 340-343. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1812-1815. 1235

The word does not actually mean planing, which refers to wood alone, but
rather cutting out, pruning, cutting off, as is usually done when
troughs, winepresses and the like are hollowed out. We have retained the
word \"höfeln\" for this reason, because it contains a beautiful
interpretation and alludes more closely to the doctrine of repentance.

Although the prophet is talking about the people of that time in this
way, this transition is connected with the previous prophecy of the
kingdom of Christ, because it has always been the same word in the
church, but in the time of the New Testament it is presented more
clearly, as Christ also says \[Luc. 10, 24.\]: \"Many prophets and kings
wanted to see that you see, and did not see it\", and yet says \[Joh. 8,
56.\] that Abraham saw the day of Christ. Therefore, if you compare the
church of the Old Testament with the church of the New Testament, it is
like a man with stupid eyes who looks at something from a distance. He
sees the same thing that another sees who has sharper eyes, but not as
clearly. He recognizes a mountain, a tower, a castle, a city from a
distance, but those who see more clearly can distinguish even the
smallest parts of the buildings.

In this way, the same doctrine has been presented to the church at all
times in words, the same things, but the New Testament brings these very
things closer to the eyes and lets them be seen more clearly. Thus, the
prophet now summarizes the brief epitome of the doctrine in delicate
brevity and with a marvelous force.

**V. 6 For I delight in love and not in sacrifice, and in the knowledge
of God and not in burnt offerings.**

This saying is not only worthy of note because it contains the summa of
Christian doctrine, which has always been in the world, in the church,
but also because it has been quoted twice by Christ. Therefore, before
we interpret it, let us see how Christ used it, for the interpretation
of the Old Testament must everywhere be taken from the New.

This saying is used by Christ Matth. 9, 13.

Christ protects himself against the Pharisees, because he called Matthew
to the ministry of the word, and was not ashamed of eating with sinners,
because the Pharisees were unwilling. But Christ tells them to learn
what it is: \"I am well pleased with mercy\" 2c. He therefore indicates
that God not only wants to have mercy, by which we help one another in
bodily ills, but also in spiritual ones. This happens in the way that
teachers approach sinners, instruct them, admonish them from sins and
exhort them to godliness. Since God demands this mercy, Christ justly
defends his actions.

Secondly, this saying is cited in Matth. 12, 7, where the Pharisees
judged the disciples because they plucked up ears of corn and ate them
on the Sabbath. Therefore, in this passage Christ calls this mercy, that
one does not judge others, as Paul also says \[1 Cor. 13, 5. Vulg.\]:
\"Love is not suspicious\", that is, it takes and interprets everything
for the best. Therefore, these two passages show that the word here
means nothing other than what we call \"love\" or \"mercy.\" This, Hosea
says, is more pleasing to God than sacrifice.

But he connects \"the knowledge of God\" with love, which he prefers to
burnt offerings. We have often said, however, what it is to know God,
namely, to know what God\'s will is toward us. We will not find this
knowledge in the law, for the law does nothing other than to indicate
what God demands of us, namely, love toward God and toward one\'s
neighbor, as Christ Matt. 22, 37. 39. beautifully summarizes the summa
of the law in these two commandments: \"You shall love God your Lord
with all your heart, and your neighbor as yourself.\" If you should ask
what God\'s will is against those who do not keep these two commandments
\[the answer is\]: He threatens them with wrath and eternal punishment.

The true knowledge of God must therefore be taken from the Gospel, for
this shows that the Son of God was sent into this world to make sinners
blessed. This

1236 **L. XXIV, 343-348.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 6, 6-8. w.
**VI. 181\^-1818.** 1237

is such a knowledge of God, which does not arouse hatred against God,
but reverence, love and obedience. For who would want such a kind God to
be offended? Who should not gladly follow and obey him? Therefore, the
knowledge of God is rightly counted among the highest services of God,
for it includes diligence in words, faith, invocation, hope, patience in
adversity, obedience 2c.

Therefore, the prophet connects the law with the gospel in this passage
and shows which are the noblest services in which we must make an effort
if we want to be considered servants of God, namely, that we love our
neighbor and accept the gospel, that is, that we believe in the
forgiveness of sins and eternal life, by grace, free of charge, through
Christ. The godly know that this goal is presented to them, toward which
they must run.

But why does he add the comparison with the sacrifices? They too were
commanded by God. But since they were only models of the future
sacrifice by Christ, and an exercise in obedience for a time, the
prophet shows that these legal services are required in such a way that
nevertheless greater care is to be taken for the higher services, which
have been in vogue in the church at all times, namely love towards
one\'s neighbor and the knowledge of God. But the godless crowd of the
Jews neglected the word and persecuted the prophets, and yet hoped that
they would please God because of those outward and legal services.
Therefore the prophets preach so often against the sacrifices and reject
them completely. For they were not commanded to obtain forgiveness of
sins by them; that was reserved for the sacrifice of Christ. They were
an outward exercise of obedience by which God wanted to distinguish His
people from the Gentiles; He did not want to free them from sins in this
way.

**V. 7. But they transgress the covenant, as Adam did, in that they
despise me.**

This is the conclusion of this sermon, which has many excellent
teachings. In the beginning, there is a good description of sin, that it
is

is a transgression of the covenant. Because it is a disobedience, on
which punishment is set. But he remembers Adam for this reason, that he
may show that sin is planted among us. For just as Adam was forbidden to
touch the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, but did not obey the
will of God, and therefore fell into the punishment that was set for
this sin, so God wanted His people to be bound to the knowledge of God
and the love of their neighbor. But what happens? Adam plucks the
forbidden apple, the Jews throw away the knowledge of God and the love
of neighbor, and serve their benefit and honor. Therefore, they take
upon themselves the punishments laid down in the law.

But the mention of the covenant also serves to show that the promises
made to this people of the kingdom and priesthood are conditional,
contrary to the stubborn presumption of the Jews, who thought that it
would never happen that God should reject his people. What follows now
interprets this general statement further, and speaks in particular.

V. 8 **For Gilead is a city full of idolatry and blood debts.**

It indicates a twofold sin, the lying worship of God and the tyrannical
worldly rule. And these are always connected to each other, as Christ
indicates when he calls the devil a father of lies and a murderer \[John
8:44\]. For those who follow ungodly services are cruel to those by whom
they see themselves punished. Thus the pope, because he wants the
ungodly services to be maintained in the church, rages against the godly
teachers with cruelty of every kind.

Hosea complains about the same thing in this passage concerning the
kingdom of Israel. The kingdom of Israel had several cities that stood
out for their idolatry, such as Samaria, the capital of the kingdom,
BethEl, Dan, Gilgal, BethAven. But the prophet uses the name of the land
of Gilead for a certain purpose, to make sin great, because in it was
the city of refuge or the sanctuary of Ramoth, Deut. 4:43, a dwelling
place of the kingdom of Israel.

1238 L. XXIV. 34S-347. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1818-1821. 1239

The Levites went to the seat of the Levites, so that they would know
about the death that had not happened willingly, but unawares. But what
happens? There, where God wanted to be resisted with special diligence
against the death blow, there became the greatest occasion for the death
blow because of idolatry.

Thus, in the beginning, Christians began to build churches so that the
people would gather in a certain place to hear the Word, pray, and use
the sacraments, but not only through the negligence of the popes, but
also through their wickedness, it happened that the Word was taught
almost nowhere, and everyone thought that the churches were only
intended for the ungodly sacrifice of the Mass; so much has Satan at all
times shown himself to be an adversary of God and an enemy of the right
worship of God.

What Jerome tells about the blood debts or murder deeds according to the
information of some Jew is fabulated. For the prophet himself now
explains what he meant by it, since he says that Gilead is loaded with
blood debts.

**V. 9: And the priests with their company are like unto the thunderers
that lie in wait for the people, and choke them in the way that goeth to
Shechem; for they do what they will.**

This is an excellent Bjld, that he compares the priests, who are anxious
to increase the idolatrous services, with highwaymen, who occupy the
places suitable for an ambush, and attack the wayfarers unawares. For
they have the office appointed to instruct the church. But because they
reject the word and teach such things from which the richest profit
flows to them, not the knowledge of God, not love, not charity, what
happens? The people go along like a safe wanderer, and while they think
they are on the right and safe path to eternal life, they are plunged
into hell by the godless teachers.

Jerome translates the word \"Shechem\" by a generic name (appellative),
but it is a proper name in this place, because it is a part of the
desert, which is near Jericho. Therefore Christ also looked at Hosea,

He tells the story of the man who went down from Jerusalem to Jericho
and fell among the murderers. For there he also punishes the priest and
the Levite in the same way as Hosea does here.

Thus the godless teachers pervert the ministry of preaching, which was
instituted to serve life, so that it becomes an occasion of destruction.
Therefore, they sin far more grievously than those who rob unafraid
wanderers, for they not only rob their poor listeners and take their
money and goods, they not only damage the bodies but also strangle the
souls and subject them to eternal torment.

What is written in the Hebrew, XXX XXX XX, we have perhaps not
translated inappropriately, because the word vor means intention and
thinking. Although this is an undecided word (*meson*), it has here a
meaning in an evil sense, that they do everything they only ever think
of, \"what they think, they may do\". Thus the Germans use this word
generally of the monks, that they have such a desperate wickedness that
they think of nothing that they should not dare to practice.

**V. 10 I see in the house of Israel that I am afraid; for Ephraim
fornicates, and Israel defiles itself.**

This is known from the foregoing; nevertheless, it is worthwhile for us
to remember that the idolaters do not please themselves more in anything
than in their worship. Therefore, the Israelites thought that they had
rendered extraordinary service to God by increasing the divine services,
just as the monks and the sacristan think that they render an extremely
pleasant service to God only when they sacrifice, when they keep certain
days, when they fast.

But what does the Lord say here? \"I see that I am afraid.\" For the
divine services, which men invent for themselves without the command of
God, are nothing more pleasing to God than the adultery of his shameful
wife to an honorable man. Therefore, as the husband casts out the
adulteress, so the kingdom of Israel is finally cast out of its land and
transferred among the Gentiles, without mercy and without hope of

1240 **L. LXIV, S47-S4S.** Interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 6, 11. 7,
1st **W. VI, 1821-1824.** 1241

Return, as the prophet prophesied in the first chapter.

**V.11. But Judah will still have a harvest before it when I turn around
my people\'s prison.**

The kingdom of Judah was also led away captive by the Babylonians
because of its sin. But this captivity was not an eternal one. For the
sake of the promise that had happened to David (which he here
figuratively calls a harvest), this people had to remain and be
restored, so that Christ would be born from the same.

But the time of Christ\'s kingdom is gloriously adorned by the fact that
the prophet compares it to a harvest. And Christ imitated this image in
the likeness of the seed that brings forth manifold fruit \[Luc. 8:5
ff\]. This is the true fruit for which the word is sown, so that men may
know God and be saved. But how 1) unblessed are those who leave off here
and are not diligent workers in this harvest! In this way, the prophet
concludes this chapter with a serious admonition.

1\) Erlanger: Hnoä instead of: Huaw.

**The seventh chapter.**

**V. 1. If I want to heal Israel, first find the sin of Ephraim and the
wickedness of Samaria, 2) how they practice idolatry. For though they
are plagued with thieves among themselves, and with robbers by heart;
yet 2c.**

The following sermon is also a legal one. It contains a punishment of
idolatry and threatens the sure sinners with punishment. There is no
difficulty in the matter here, only the grammar is somewhat obscure
because of the images, which (as foolish reason judges) are somewhat
harsh; but if we look at them more carefully, although they are crude
and taken from the midst of life, they depict the aspirations of the
idolaters quite accurately. It is clear from this passage, however, that
just as the church has had the same enemy at all times, so also the
temptations are the same. For if you compare the despisers of the Word
that we have today with the Israelites, you will say that one egg could
not be more like another.

The Lord complains that since he is anxious to heal Israel, Israel, even
more so at the beginning, as if driven by the spirits of hell (furiis),
is most eagerly engaged in idolatry.

2\) From here on, the following in Latin reads like this: Hula operantur
rnenäavinrn, läeo venit kur st latro toris sxoliat.

and to sin more licentiously. It is something wonderful and almost
unbelievable, but look at the examples we have before us and you will
say that it is still happening today.

The Lord has made known to us through His Word the right worship of God,
that we should believe the Gospel and call upon the so merciful Father
in the name of Christ, through whose merit or death we are freed from
sin and death. Therefore, idolatry and false worship are condemned, and
men are exhorted to set aside the ordinances of men and earnestly engage
in the good works commanded by God. But is not the godlessness of the
papists revealed here and the wickedness of the Church of the
Antichrist? They also try to suppress the true doctrine by force of
arms, the ungodly services of the masses, the idolatry in the invocation
\[of the saints\], and what other abuses there are, they now begin to
defend seriously and, as much as they are able, they fortify them. Thus
also Israel killed the right teachers and pressed with all the greater
fury on its services, since

3\) Erlanger: tarnen rniseriooräiarn instead of: tarn rniserivoräern.

1242 L. XXIV. S4S-35I. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1824-1827. 1243

it heard that they were punished by godly teachers.

But how did the Lord avenge this stubborn wickedness? The thief has
come, says the prophet, and the armed man has invaded the land, that is,
as we say, at home and from without they are plagued and plundered. For
he does not call him the thief who breaks through the wall by night and
secretly takes away what he can, but the lies, the deceit, the avarice,
the unjust violence, the injustice that the citizens do to each other,
the unjust public burdens that are imposed by stingy authorities. For
these are the most pernicious thieves, by whom the commonwealths are
plundered. To this trouble at home, he says, comes from outside the
enemy and wars.

Do we not also feel this in our time? The princes rob their subjects
most shamefully. The citizens among themselves know no measure of their
avarice. And in addition, there is the Turkish tyrant, as well as other
wars. Thus poor Germany is oppressed on both sides, but it is ripe for
punishment, so that in fact, as the old man says in the comedy 1), not
even the goddess of salvation herself could save it, even if she wished
it. And we, who nevertheless boast of the Gospel, are not entirely
without these punishments, for we see that the same damage to the
commonwealth is also going on with us, the harmful thief and the
plundering enemy. Therefore, these are also punishments of our sins,
because we misuse the gospel and do not walk worthily according to it.

**V. 2. Yet they do not want me to see their wickedness. But I can see
their wickedness, which they do everywhere.**

This is a punishment of safety, which is the most harmful evil, because
it keeps away repentance, by which alone the access to the relief of
public distress is open. In these sins, says the prophet, they continue
as surely as if they were sure that I do not know. But I know it very
well, because these sins are constantly before me.

1\) lerent. 4, 7, 43.

eyes, and cannot be overlooked. Therefore, they will give rise to more
severe punishments.

But see also here our adversaries: do they not behave as if they had
heard a voice from heaven that they would flee from the wrath of God? as
John \[Matth. 3, 7.\] says to the Pharisees. But this is for the comfort
of the church, that God says that the wicked are constantly before His
eyes. For when the punishment is not there, and the idolaters cruelly
persecute the godly, the hearts of the godly are often challenged, as if
God were busy with other things and did not care about His Church. But
indeed, God sees not only the deeds that can be seen with the eyes, but
also the counsels and the intentions and the innermost part of the
heart, therefore He will not always let them go unpunished.

**V. 3. They put off the king by their wickedness, and the princes by
their lies.**

Here he actually speaks of the sin of the priests, who not only did not
punish idolatry, but also tried to gain the grace of the princes by
their idolatrous services. For the wickedness of which the prophet here
speaks is not a civil, but an ecclesiastical one, which includes ungodly
worship and ungodly doctrines; therefore he calls them \"lies.\" For the
simple are deceived, and thinking to make themselves agreeable to GOtte,
they offend him to the highest degree. Thus, when a monk fasts, when he
zealously worships the saints, when he says masses, he is in truth
making a fool of himself with lies, for these are not acts of worship,
but blasphemies and the highest disobedience to GOtte.

**V. 4: They are all adulterers, like an oven that the baker heats when
he has kneaded and leavened the dough and let it rise.**

Here he explains what wickedness and what lie he is talking about,
namely, the shameful adultery, that they have departed from the true
God, and like an adulterous woman have gone to strange wooers, to idols
and forbidden

1244 L. xxiv, \[si-sss. Interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 7, 4-7. W.
vi, iM-isso. 1245

Divine services. The likeness actually serves to illustrate the fierce
zeal that is in the idolaters. For they are hot like an oven when it is
heated. As for the grammar, I consider that the sense is correctly and
actually rendered.

**V. 5 Today is the feast of our king (they say), when the princes began
to be mad with wine; so he calls the scoffers to him.**

The brevity here makes the text dark, as it is wont to do. But the
prophet has nothing else in mind here than to interpret the parable of
the heated oven. Under the name of a becker the godless teachers are
introduced; these knead the flour, that is, they lead the people to
idolatry; then the oven is heated, that is, the people are invited to
idolatry by new ceremonies and services, as he says: \"Today is our
king\'s feast,\" that is, a special celebration. Therefore the princes
revel at court, but in the temple godless services take place, and the
authors of them are in great favor with the king. 1)

It is not unlike that great princes celebrate their birthday with great
pomp in the churches, with many masses and other ungodly ceremonies. As
in the first Psalm, v. 1, the prophet calls the godless teachers
\"mockers\", who falsify the Scriptures with their interpretation. But
this is in truth mocking God and men.

**V. 6 For their heart is in hot devotion, like an oven, when they
sacrifice and deceive the people; but their becker sleeps all night, and
in the morning he burns brightly.**

This goes also to the priests, who are the authors of the godless
services. These, he says, \"when they deceive the people,\" that is,
when they deal with idolatry, are like a heated oven, that is, they burn
with tremendous desire to increase and strengthen idolatry. For they see
that in this way they have access to the favor of the princes, and in
this way they also increase their wealth quite handsomely. But these
plots will not go out happily for them, because just as if the

1\) Erlanger: inZratia instead of: in Zratia.

If the fire, while the becker is lying there overcome by sleep, bursts
out of the heated oven and engulfs everything in flames, idolatry will
be the ruin of the kingdom of Israel.

**V. 7. They are still as hot with devotion as an oven. Though their
judges be eaten up, and all their kings fall, yet there is none among
them that doth worship me.**

Here he says without a picture what he said above about the fire burning
in the oven and consuming the Becker himself.

At this point, however, the stages of ungodliness must be noted. The
first is that the idolaters are not satisfied with your words, but the
more diligently God admonishes them through the prophets, the more
fiercely they lay on idolatry. This sin is followed by their
punishments, for the judges and kings fall, and the people are plundered
by the neighboring pagans.

The other sin is that, just as they did not listen to God when He kindly
called them by the Word, so they do not care about Him when He strikes
them. They imagine that their misfortune has other causes than their
idolatry. So also Isaiah complains in the ninth chapter (2), v. 13, that
the people do not turn to him who smites them. Therefore also in this
piece the counsel of God is in vain. For just as God wanted to turn them
away from idolatry through the word, so He also sends punishments for
the same purpose, so that they may recognize their sins and return to
the right path through repentance. But since neither by words nor by
blows anything is accomplished, what else can be expected but
desolation?

Therefore, this passage teaches about the intention of God in punishing
sins. For he does not intend to reject and condemn us because of sin. In
this way he calls us to repentance, that we may depart from evil, and
call upon him. For this is the way to meet the wrath of God, if we
combine repentance with prayer.

But what do the idolaters do? Even if

2\) In the editions: in I. oaxits.

1246 D. XXIV, 353-356. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1830-1832. 1247

they feel the punishments, they do not consider that they are imposed by
God in His wrath. Therefore, they do not call upon God, but call upon
their idols. They call upon people by whose power they hope to help
themselves out of the present misfortune. Thus, those who follow the
papal religion today feel the Turks and other calamities, and therefore
ask for salvation. But they do not pray to God, they put their trust in
their works, they rely on the intercessions of the saints, yes, they
even call upon the saints, while only God should be called upon in the
name of Christ. For in this way one asks for a benefit from grace in
vain, which God has promised to the Church.

**V. 8. Ephraim mingles with the nations; Ephraim is like a cake that no
one turns over.**

This is the third sin, that they not only do not call upon God, but also
rely on human help, and connect themselves with the pagans through
alliances. But this also goes badly for the idolaters, for they become
prey to those with whom they associate, as the image of the cake proves,
which can be understood in two ways. For a cake that is not turned over
burns and becomes ashes, since it is always exposed to fire on one side
only. But perhaps it is more appropriate for this passage to understand
it in such a way that the prophet intended to show by this image that
Israel would be eagerly plundered by the Gentiles, just as people who
cannot bear hunger devour the cakes half cooked, and cannot wait until
they are baked. Therefore, what he adds is, as it were, an
interpretation. He uses the word like Moses, 2 Mos. 29, 2. 3. book 7,
12. where he speaks of mixing the flour with oil, and he does the same
in this passage with the equation of the cake.

**V. 9. 10. But strangers devour his strength, yet he will not know it;
he also has gray hairs, yet he will not know it. And the hope of Israel
is humbled before their eyes; yet they turn not unto the Lord their God,
neither inquire of him in all this.**

The prophet summarizes two things in this passage, namely the certain
punishment and such a great blindness that they do not see where the
punishment they feel comes from. For if they thought they were being
punished for idolatry, they would let it go, but they do not.

What he adds of the gray hairs is rightly explained by the broken forces
of the kingdom, as the comic poet \[Terence\] calls old age a disease.
For Jeroboam, under whom the prophet lived, found the kingdom miserably
torn. But there is nothing to prevent it, if it is taken in such a way
that it serves to make sin great, for such shameful ignorance is more
abominable in an old person than in a young one.

That he says, \"the hope of Israel is humbled\", we have interpreted
above in the fifth chapter. Therefore, it is the highest sin if, after
neglecting the Word, one does not respect the punishments that God lays
down with the intention of bringing the erring back on the right path,
as the prophet shows in this passage, when he says, \"that they do not
turn to the Lord and do not inquire after God\". For \"to turn to the
Lord\" means to renounce idolatry, and \"to inquire after God\" means to
follow the word.

**V. 11. For Ephraim is like a tempted dove that does not want to notice
anything. Now they call Egypt, then they run to Assyria.**

This simile is very beautiful, also taken from the household. The dove
is most easily deceived among all birds, that it forgets its nest. Thus
he says that Ephraim also became accustomed to a foreign nest, leaving
God and the Temple, and seeking help, not from God, whose name dwelt at
Jerusalem, but from the neighboring Gentiles, the Egyptians and
Assyrians.

Isaiah also uses the simile of the doves Cap. 60, 8. when he prophesies
about the apostles and evangelists, but praises them for knowing their
windows and not being led away from the word as their right nest to
ungodly teachings. Therefore Christ also wants the apostles to be like
the deaf \[Matth. 10, 16\], as far as the simplicity and the truth are
concerned.

1248 **XXIV, SS6-358. Interpretation of Hosea (3rd), Cap. 7, 11-14. W.
VI, 1832-1835.** 1249

innocence. By the way, he adds: \"Be wise as serpents\", because the
foolish doves are deceived and get used to strange nests. This does not
have to be the case with a disciple of Christ, for they must demonstrate
a wise simplicity. For \"simplicity\" is to look at nothing but God\'s
honor and the salvation of one\'s neighbor, \"prudence\" is to beware of
Satan\'s snares and to rely only on the Word.

**V. 12. But as they run to and fro, I will cast my net over them and
bring it down, as the birds of the air; I will punish them as one
preaches in their gathering.**

This is finally the reward of the godless being and the outcome of the
godless alliances, which are undertaken in the hope of human help. There
is an emphasis in the pronoun \"my\" when he says: \"My net\", because
it is of such a kind that the wicked cannot escape. But the likeness
includes both the safety of the wicked and their sudden and accidental
destruction.

What is written in Hebrew, \"according to how one preaches in their
assembly,\" is a familiar figure of speech. But it refers to the
punishments that Moses threatens the wicked. So also Isaiah often says
that not even one of the things threatened by the Lord will fail to
happen. For, as the Gospel testifies, they used to read Moses on the
Sabbath days in their schools or assemblies. But we are to consider that
the same punishments will come upon each one of us if we do not keep the
word and repent, and if we do not cease from ungodly worship.

**V. 13 Woe to them that they depart from me; they must be destroyed,
for they have gone astray from me. I would have redeemed them if they
had not taught lies against me.**

This is the conclusion of the present sermon. But it must be noted that
the Lord everywhere adds his person: \"They have departed from me\",
\"they have become apostates from me\", \"they teach lies against me\",
\"they do not call on me\", \"they think evil of me\". Therefore, how do
we punish the sins according to

If we distinguish between the sins of the first tablet and the sins of
the second tablet, we are to conclude that the prophet is not speaking
of the sins of the second tablet, but of the sins of the first tablet.

\"To depart from GOD\" means to let go of faith in GOD and to trust in
people and rely on their help.

\"To become apostate from the LORD,\" that is, to change the worship of
God and to commit idolatry.

\"To teach lies against the LORD,\" that is, to profane the name of GOD
by ungodly teaching.

\"Not calling on the LORD,\" that is, desecrating the name of GOD by
calling on it falsely.

\"To think evil of the Lord\" means to remember that one wants to hold
on to and spread false worship. And this includes the persecution of the
word, as well as the abuse of peace and the other gifts that the wicked
use to defend their idolatry.

He mentions these sins in the following conclusion and threatens that it
will happen that they will be destroyed because of them. Therefore,
warned by their example, we should learn to beware. We, too, are poor
sinners, but by God\'s grace we escape these sins against the first
table, since we hold fast the right services and the pure doctrine;
therefore the hope of grace remains for us. But those who combine
ungodly doctrine with ungodly worship, as our adversaries do, what else
can they promise themselves but ruin.

The fact that he says: \"I wanted to redeem them, but they teach lies
against me\", goes back to the time of Jeroboam. Although Jeroboam was a
godless king, he was fortunate because he brought back to the kingdom of
Israel what the forefathers had lost, namely from Hemath to the sea, 2
Kings 14:25.

**V.14. Neither do they call upon me from their hearts, but they listen
in their camps. They gather together for the sake of grain and Mosiah,
and disobey me.**

They do cry out, and from the heart, for that is what their need urges
them to do; but this is the fault, that they do not cry out to the Lord
from the heart.

1250 L. XXIV, 358-361. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1835-1839. 1251

For they came together by their idols, and called in a forbidden place;
for the temple at Jerusalem was appointed for prayer; therefore also
they that were absent in body turned their faces thither. But Israel
despised the temple and had idolatrous temples built without the Word
and against the commandment of God, which the prophet here calls
\"camps,\" for he alludes to the similitude of adultery. It is
especially remarkable that the prophet calls the idolatrous calling a
\"hearing\" (ululatum - howling), for just as a musical harmony delights
the ears, so a howling offends the ears. The right call is a very sweet
music for God, but the wrong and idolatrous call offends his ears and
heart in the most serious way.

But this saying should be written on the walls of all churches,
especially those in which the pews of the chaplains are. For since
nothing else happens there but people shouting at each other with the
highest zeal, the prophet indicates here what is wrong with this
service.

The first and almost the highest infirmity is that if this is an
invocation, it is not only without heart, but also without all
understanding; I will refrain from saying that this invocation of the
saints or men elevated to gods (divorum) is altogether idolatrous.

The second error is that in truth, as the Prophet says here, \"they
gather for the sake of grain and mosi.\" For if this work were not
exposed to this reward, they would never gather for these efforts.
Therefore, their God, whom they worship with these songs, is not the God
of heaven, whom they do not know, but bread and wine, which they eat and
fatten themselves with.

The third fault is that they perform this service in such a way that
they resist GOtte with the greatest effort and zeal, that is, the pure
doctrine, which they would like to condemn and eradicate as a heresy.
And indeed, this godless kind of people dares to ask why we have done
away with the in so many respects godless service from our churches?

**V. 15. I teach them and strengthen their arm, but they think evil of
me.**

This also belongs to the times of Jeroboam. But he remembers two and
very high benefits; the first is that he instructs through the prophets
and sends the word. For this time had five excellent prophets, Amos,
Hosea, Isaiah, Micah, and Nahum, all of whom exhorted the people to
repentance, prophesying that the Assyrian would lay waste their land
unless they converted and forsook idolatry.

Then \'he also strengthened their arms, that is, God graced the worldly
regiment with peace and victories, as we told shortly before about
Jeroboam. But how have they used of these gifts? Against me, he says,
they think evil, that is, they misuse peace and victory to suppress the
word and the right worship, and to fortify their idolatry. For the word
does not mean merely \"to think,\" but to be intent on something with
diligence and earnestness.

**V. 16. They are converted, but not rightly, but are like a false bow;
therefore their princes shall fall by the sword; their dread shall
become a mockery in the land of Egypt.**

This is the resolution. Even if I strike them because of their sin, I do
not remedy anything. For when they feel their plagues, they do not turn
to me, but call on their idols and seek help from men.

Therefore, what will finally be the end. You will be like a false bow.
The bow is made to hit the enemy. If the string breaks or something like
that happens, it is useless. So here he threatens that even though the
kingdom of Israel will lack neither counsel nor action, all its
undertakings will be disastrous because of its sins. Thus he interprets:
\"Therefore their princes will fall\" 2c.

The opposite sense is in the 127th Psalm, v. 4. where he compares the
children of those who let themselves be ruled by GOD to the arrows in
the hand of a strong one, for he indicates blissful rulers. But here the
arrows are indeed in a hand, and in a mighty hand, because the kingdom
of Israel was under

1252 mv. **361-363.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 7, 16. 8, 1.
2. W. **VI, 1839-1842.** 1253

Jeroboam in beautiful bloom, but the bow is wrong, that is, they fall in
their enterprise. And this happens because of the distrust of their
tongues, because they are reproachful against the godly teachers and
gloriously praise their power and means of help, by which they hope to
be safe. For Egypt will deceive them, therefore they will be laughed at.

The Hebrews follow a different opinion, for they call a false bow that
which is drawn in falseness, so that when you think it will hit on the
right, it will hit on the left.

ken meets. And on this opinion the Septuagint Ps. 78, 57. have
translated the word XXXX by a \"loose bow\" (versatilem), στρεβλόν*,
which is* easily directed hither and thither. And it is not
inappropriate for this passage either to have this opinion, that it is
not a matter of punishment, but of guilt. Like a false bow they convert,
as if to repent. But they do not turn to God, they continue in their
idolatry. If you hope that they will go to the right, they turn to the
left 2c.

**The eighth chapter.**

**V. 1. Cry aloud like a trumpet (and say): He is already coming over
the house of the LORD like an eagle; because they are transgressing my
covenant and turning away from my law.**

This, too, is a legal sermon in which the prophet condemns both idolatry
and reliance on human protection or alliances with the heathen, and
threatens destruction. Therefore, as far as the matter is concerned,
there is absolutely no difficulty here, nor is the grammar obscure.

The beginning of this chapter refers to the kingdom of Judah, because it
expressly remembers the house of the Lord, which 1) was in Jerusalem.
However, although some refer this prophecy to the Babylonian captivity,
it is more correctly referred to the misery inflicted on the kingdom of
Judah by Sanherib, as the following proves.

The simile of the eagle must be related to the speed as well as to the
power of the enemy. For in both the eagle surpasses all the birds and
therefore it has the name of a king of the birds. But what is the cause
of this misfortune? Certainly the transgression of the covenant and the
violation of the law. Those, therefore, who want to be without these
dangers, must make every effort to obey the word.

1\) Instead of yuoä should probably be read yuss, referring to äoiiius.

God had made such a covenant with His people that if they obeyed the
law, they would be showered with benefits of every kind, but if they
deviated from the law, they were threatened with certain punishments.
Such a covenant was not made with the Gentiles. For as far as outward
worship is concerned, all is done, and yet the first commandment is a
general one and concerns all. Therefore, those who obey God will receive
some fruit of their obedience, but those who deviate from obedience will
suffer punishment.

**V. 2. Then will they cry out to me: You are my God, we know you,
Israel.**

This is interpreted by almost everyone in the same sense: as if they
would cry out in vain, as he said above Cap. 5, 6. about the kingdom of
Israel: \"Then they will seek me, but will not find me.\" But I have
said above that this sermon actually goes to the kingdom of Judah, which
is saved by God from the enemy.

Therefore, the opinion is that the kingdom of Judah, being afflicted by
the Assyrians, will recognize its sin and cry out to God for salvation
and be preserved, as the history of the godly king Hezekiah testifies.
And this is also proved by the fact that the prophets indicate that not
only the service of God, but also the name of God was unequal in the
kingdom of Judah.

[1254 L. XXIV, 363-365. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1842-1844. 1255]{.underline}

and Israel. For Israel called GOD by the pagan name of Baal, but Judah,
as it kept the right worship, so it called GOD by its right name.

But it is useful that we consider this example of the kingdom of Judah
at this time. For it shows that there is hope of grace for those who,
though they are sinners, keep the word and worship. But those who
persecute the word and remain in idolatrous worship will be punished
exceedingly severely and, according to the example of Israel, will be
destroyed from the foundation of the world if they do not repent.
Furthermore, he calls \"Israel\" here the God of Israel; this, they say,
they know, that is, they keep his word and his worship.

**Other sermon to the kingdom of Israel. 1)**

**V. 3. Israel rejects the good, therefore the enemy must persecute
them.**

A short saying, but very glorious. The word and true worship he calls
\"the good,\" for \[Ps. 119:165.\] \"Great peace have they that love thy
law, O LORD.\" For these have GOD for a protector in all dangers. But
those who forsake this good and depart from it, what do they do but
bring themselves into misfortune? To be sure, the world does this with
great zeal, either neglecting or persecuting the Word. For it neglects
and pursues the good, but seizes its ruin and chases after it. What
follows now explains what it is to \"forsake the good.

**V. 4 They make kings, but without me; they set princes, and I know
not. Out of their silver and gold they make idols, that they may soon be
cut off.**

He does not speak of the election of the king, which is lawful, but of
the covenants with kings and princes, as he said above \[Cap. 7, 11.\]
that they call the Assyrian and the Egyptian king. For though the first
Jeroboam is made king by sedition, yet to him who knows the history of

1\) This heading appears in the Latin editions only after the following
Bible text.

carefully, it is clear that the kingdom of Israel was approved by God.
Therefore, he does not speak of the succession in the government, but of
the covenants with the Gentiles. Therefore he adds: XXXX XXX without me
they do this, namely by letting go of the confidence which they should
firmly keep in me. Thus, he says, princes would be set without him
knowing it. This is the first deviation from the good.

The other is that they make idols out of gold and silver, that is, they
attach divine honor to gold and silver, as they are wont to do in the
papacy, when they worship the images of the saints. This sin of idolatry
is followed by destruction.

**V. 5. Your calf, Samaria, he cast out; my wrath is kindled against
them; it cannot stand long, they must be punished (non poterunt perpetuo
innocentes esse).**

. He has threatened ruin; now he repeats sin; let it be because of the
worship and service of the calf. Therefore, not improperly taken as
nominative, \"Thy calf hath cast thee off,\" that is, idolatry is the
cause of ruin for thee. For the LORD cannot suffer the same. What we
have translated, \"They will not remain innocent forever,\" reads in the
Hebrew: How long will they not be able to remain innocent? This is very
short and obscure, but in fact it is the same as saying, \"They are
guilty, therefore they will not remain unpunished in their sins forever.

**V. 6: For the calf came from Israel, and a craftsman made it, and
cannot be God; therefore the calf of Samaria shall be pulverized.**

This is easy, for it serves to ridicule idolatry. For what is more
foolish than to fall down before wood, stone, silver or gold made by
human hands? Why does one not fall down before him, why does one not
call upon him who made everything out of nothing? Because he can save.
But gold, silver, stone, wood cannot even save itself, but is crushed.

1256 **L- XXIV, 365-367.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 8, 6-10.
**w. VI. 1844-1847.** 1257

And yet the entire papacy still lies drowned in this shameful, vile and
pernicious idolatry.

**V. 7 For they sow the wind, and reap the whirlwind: their seed shall
not come up, neither shall their plant yield flour; though it yield, yet
shall strangers eat it.**

This is a description of a useless advice. The most suitable time for
sowing is when it is quiet. So the time to reap is inconvenient when it
is not cheerful. Therefore he says: Just as the beginning is unfortunate
because of idolatry and reliance on men, so also the end will be
exceedingly sad, just as if someone sowed in a great storm and reaped in
great downpours; then one can hardly find a stalk that could be of any
use 2c.

**V. 8. Israel is eaten up; the Gentiles deal with them as with an
unworthy vessel.**

The fact that the prophet so often repeats one and the same thing proves
that these sermons were neither preached at one and the same time, nor
at one place, and that the secure Israelites had hoped to despise them.
For this is what the wicked do: the nearer they are to danger, the safer
they live, as Solomon says \[Proverbs 16:18\]: \"He who is to perish
becomes proud first; and proud courage comes before the fall.\" But the
Israelites\' courage grew through the success of the happy king
Jeroboam.

But how miserably the world deceives itself! The merciful God had given
such glorious victories to the kingdom of Israel, so that there would be
a peaceful life, and the congregations could be taught about the right
worship, and so that the punishment of idolatry would be averted through
repentance; for God truly does not want the death of the sinner, but
that he should convert and live. But the more the kingdom flourished,
the more the godless people laid on idolatry and despised the Word. They
sought the friendship of the neighboring kings and their help, and so
they thought they would be safe if, for instance, a

The prophet lists these sins and threatens them with desolation. The
prophet lists these sins at this point and threatens them with
desolation.

But it is a wonderful image that he compares Israel to an unclean
vessel, which no one desires, but immediately throws it away as soon as
it comes into his hand. Thus, rejected by God because of their idolatry,
they were also held in great contempt among the Gentiles.

**V. 9. 10. Therefore they run up to Assyria like a deer astray. Ephraim
gives tribute to the wooers and gives tribute to the heathen. The same
heathen will I now gather upon them; they shall soon be weary of the
burden of the king and of the princes.**

This is the first sin, that they forgot God and the Law and relied on
the help of the Gentiles. For this is what happens when trust in God is
lost, then one takes refuge in human help. This is the head of idolatry
and a sin against the first commandment, which forbids the service of
other gods, that is, reliance on creatures.

The word is explained by forest donkey, but it seems to me a general
word, as we say \"game\" (feras). And perhaps this designation \[ferae\]
originated from the Hebrew word, like many other words, both Greek and
Latin.

But that he adds XX XXXX XXX, a game alone for itself, is nothing else
than a game which wanders around alone, and, not sure of life, wanders
soon here and soon there.

What he says about the wooers and the pagans, to whom tribute is given,
also belongs to this. But there is an emphasis in the word as if he
wanted to say: My people should detest the fellowship with the pagans,
who do not know God and hate the right worship. But they even give them
gifts and spend a lot of money on them. But what will be the end? They
shall become weak from the burden of the king and the princes, that is,
these covenants will be their undoing. For \"the same Gentiles will I
gather,\" on whose help they shall rely to oppress Israel.

1258 L. XXIV, 367-369. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
I847-18S0. 1259

Others derive the word from which means to begin, but it will be more
properly derived from weak, for it gives a more fitting sense, and does
not so much dispute grammar.

**V.11. For Ephraim made the altars to sin much; so also the altars
shall be sin for him.**

This is the second sin, ungodly worship or idolatry, that they made much
of altars on which sacrifices were made, while God willed that there
should be only One Temple in Jerusalem.

But why does he say that the altars were made much to sin? Surely they
did not build the altars in the opinion that they wanted to sin, but
thought that this service would please God. This, therefore, is the
judgment and opinion of the Holy Spirit, who says what is true and
paints idolatry with its true colors. For although they firmly believed
that they were worshipping the true God in this way, this worship, since
it was done without the Word, even against the Word, could not please
God, and was in fact nothing other than sin. Thus, a monk anxiously
observes the commandments of his order, he holds masses with great
devotion, but because both are done against the Word, he heaps up his
sins through this very spirituality (religione) and provokes God to
anger.

V. 12: **If I write to him as much of my law, it will be regarded as a
foreign doctrine.**

This is the third sin. The prophets punished idolatry, and taught from
the word of God about the right services, about the fear of God, about
faith in the promised Seed, about obedience to the Law, again about the
outward services in the place which God had indicated, but XXXXX XXXXX
they thought the pre

The teachings of the prophets were none of their business; they despised
them and condemned them as a doctrine that would also be harmful to the
commonwealth and would destroy religion among the people, just as the
papists condemn the gospel today.

1\) Hiphil from \^n.

**V.13. Though they sacrifice much, and bring flesh, and eat it, yet the
LORD hath no pleasure in it; but he will remember their iniquity, and
make an atonement for their sins, which turn to Egypt.**

This is a tremendous reduction of the sacrifices. This is truly a great
gift, he says, which you offer to me! You sacrifice animals for
slaughter, meat; you eat it afterwards. Should I be so pleased with this
service? 2) You do not sacrifice to me, but to yourselves, because you
satisfy your bodies. In this way, sins are not atoned for. Therefore,
just as I have mercy on those who take refuge in mercy and ask for mercy
by trusting in the promised seed, so your sins shall be kept. I will
remember them and atone for them, since you have no better way to atone
for them than to bring flesh and eat it. But here he repeats the sin,
the trust in human help, while only in God the trust should be put, as
he now adds:

**V. 14. Israel forgets its Creator and builds churches, so Judah makes
many strong cities; but I will send fire into its cities, and it will
consume its houses.**

Here is also a sin of flourishing kingdoms and communities, that they
build buildings at great expense, and hope that they will be safe from
the enemy\'s power and weapons. But \"where the Lord does not guard the
city, the watchman watches in vain\" \[Ps. 127:1\]. Therefore not the
building but the trust in it is punished here. But to show that this is
vain, the Lord himself threatens that he will send fire, which cannot be
quenched with water. -

Thus the prophet shows in this chapter what the sins are for which the
flourishing kingdoms are destroyed. But this serves to instruct us, so
that we, warned by the example of the kingdom of Israel, may guard
against such sins.

2\) Erlanger: dslsatarst instead of: äklsotarsr.

[1260 **XXIV. 369-372.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 9, 1-3. **w.
VI, 1850-1854**. 1261]{.underline}

**The ninth chapter.**

**V. 1. You must not rejoice, O Israel, nor boast as the nations do, for
you are hurting against your God.**

This is also a sermon of repentance, in which he condemns the idolatry
of the kingdom of Israel and threatens desolation. Therefore, everything
is clear.

The sermons so often repeated by the prophets show not only the
greatness of this sin, but also the obstinate stubbornness of the
idolaters; therefore we should not be surprised today that our
adversaries so stubbornly defend what is theirs, and are not satisfied
with any of our admonitions. For Satan keeps his old ways, and holds
those who are once entangled in ungodly opinions and worship so tightly
that they cannot wriggle out of the manifold snares of ungodliness, for
they have indeed, as Paul says of his Galatians \[Gal. 3:1\], enchanted
minds. We should thank God all the more diligently for the light of the
Word and apply ourselves to it with all the greater zeal, so that we may
keep it.

In the beginning of this chapter is a threat of punishment and an
accusation of sin. The kingdom of Israel flourished under Jeroboam,
whereas before it had been plagued with many and various calamities. For
the neighboring enemy, the Syrian, had waged war against Israel
continually and with great success. But Jeroboam broke the power of the
Syrians, so that they kept within their borders. When the power of the
kingdom of Israel was strengthened, as it is wont to do in long peace,
their hearts became lush, and they dreamed that they would have this
prosperity forever. But the prophet warns them that they should not
rejoice nor boast, for the gravest sin was upon their necks, namely,
that they had fallen away from God through idolatry. This sin, he says,
will be followed by the certain punishment of desolation.

**That thou mayest seek whores\' wages, that all the threshing floors
may be full of grain.**

The prophet makes sin twofold, as above several times. For the worship
of the kingdom of Israel was a deviation from God and a shameful
adultery. But the priests kept this worship for the sake of the bodily
benefits, because it served, as the Greeks say, προς *τά άλφιτά* \[to
the

livelihood. For godlessness always seeks profit. That is why even the
papists keep the mass and other religious services, not both because of
the worship of God, but because they bring abundant profit.

In Hebrew the particle causes a darkness, you look for the reward at all
threshing floors full of grain, but the sense cannot be doubtful. Now he
says of the punishments.

V. 2. **Therefore the threshing floors and winepresses shall not nourish
thee, and the must shall fail thee.**

This is the first punishment, that they will be deprived of these
advantages and suffer lack, even though all things are in the greatest
abundance. For it is true what the Germans say in Proverbs: If all the
mountains were nothing but flour, the famine could not be averted if the
sins of men deserved it. This proves that everything depends on the
Lord\'s blessing, and not on the abundance of goods itself, which the
world seeks with such great zeal, care and effort, as if it alone were
enough.

V. 3. **and shall not abide in the land of the LORD: but Ephraim must
return into Egypt, and eat in Assyria, which is unclean.**

The second punishment is the captivity among the Gentiles. He names
Egypt and Assyria, so that it may be seen that the kingdom of Israel was
oppressed by those through whose alliance and friendship it hoped to be
secure. This is the nature of human advice, and this is how it goes with
trusting in people. About \"what is unclean\" the prophet will explain
himself soon after.

[1262 L. XXIV. 372-374. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
I8S4-I8S7. 1263]{.underline}

**V. 4: There they cannot make a drink offering of wine to the Lord or
do anything to please him. Their sacrifice shall be as the bread of the
afflicted, whereof all they that eat thereof shall be unclean: for their
bread they must eat for themselves, and shall not be brought into the
house of the LORD.**

This is the third and most bitter punishment, that they will have no
public worship, but will degenerate with their offspring into pagans,
like our people who are imprisoned in Turkey. They will not hear
sermons, they will not be able to bring their children to baptism, they
will not be able to use Holy Communion, they will not come to the
gatherings of the people who have come together to offer their prayers.
These are the penalties for the neglect of worship, as we see in this
passage. Therefore, we are to learn to use these so great gifts holy
while we can.

What he says about the \"bread of the afflicted\" is known from Deut.
26, 14. For by burying the dead one became unclean under the law.
Therefore no one dealt with those who were in mourning. And God also
wants the heart to be full of joy and hope, He wants us to rely on His
goodness, He does not want us to be sad, in fear and sorrow. This is
therefore a twofold evil, that he threatens that there will be no
services, but if there were, people would be defiled by them, not
sanctified.

What now follows: \"Their bread, which they eat for themselves, shall
not be brought into the house of the Lord,\" is the same as saying,
\"They shall eat common, unsanctified bread, as they were sanctified by
the offering of the fruit that grew out of the ground.

In Hebrew it says: XXXXX XXXX, their bread

for their soul shall not be brought or come into the house of the Lord.
We have rendered this simply, \"The bread which they eat for
themselves,\" though it is more emphatic in the Hebrew. For this is to
say: They will have no bread from which to offer anything, as they used
to do in the land of the Lord. They will have only bread with which to
nourish themselves, not with

They will have no temple, no ministers of the sanctuary, so they will
not be able to honor the Lord and serve the ministry.

**V. 5: What then will you do in the seasons and feasts of the Lord?**

\"Seasons\" he calls the certain feasts celebrated at a certain time of
the year, as the Passover, the Pentecosts 2c. But it has the same
opinion as the preceding: You will be captives among the Gentiles,
keeping no temple, no worship, none of the customary feasts.

**V. 6. Behold, they must depart from before the destroyer. Egypt shall
gather them, and Moph shall bury them. Nettles will grow where their
dear idol silver now stands, and thorns in their tents.**

He combines both captivity among the Gentiles and desolation. The word

XXXX, \"they must go away,\" the prophet uses the word οιχεσ&αί almost
as the Greeks do*,* \"they

are gone\".

\"Moph\" is thought to be Memphis in Egypt.

It is certain that the silver idols are called \"silver\", as he said
above several times, that idols are made of gold and silver, which he
calls XXXX, a \"dear\", because they delighted in this worship and
trusted in it. The exceedingly gloriously flourishing empire got into
this trouble because of its idolatry. With all the greater zeal we
should seize the light of the Word and hold it in all the greater honor.

**V. 7 The time of visitation has come, the time of vengeance; Israel
will know it.**

This is related to the preceding. But there is a special emphasis in the
fact that he calls it a time of visitation and retribution. For as long
as the punishment is far away, the wicked dream that God is a blind
Cupid, as it were, and will never pay attention to it. But soon after
\[v. 9\] 1) the prophet says: \"He will remember their iniquity, and
will punish their sin.

1\) There is a comma after xaulo xost in the outputs by mistake.

1264 **L. XXIV. 374-376.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 9, 7-9.
**W. VI, 18S7-1860.** 1265

seek.\" Therefore, they should have laid aside this security and
returned to the right path while the plague abates and they are given
time to repent. But those who let this time of repentance pass by
without fruit, afterwards seek in vain a mitigation of the punishments,
as the prophet says: \"Israel will realize it,\" that is, they will feel
that what I have proclaimed before is true.

**The prophets are fools, and the rotten spirits are mad, for the sake
of your great iniquity and for the sake of the great hostile idolatry.**

After he has punished everyone in general for idolatry, he now speaks
especially of the teachers. He calls them \"fools\", because they did
not teach the word but their dreams, likewise \"insane\", because they
defended obvious sins, which could be judged by common sense, as well as
promised better times, since everything was already going downhill. Thus
in the papacy today the use of one form is defended, the marriage of
priests is condemned, a service is made of certain food, of certain
clothing 2c. For even children can judge this. But these senseless
people, who have no sense at all, defend this also by shameful murder of
the godly.

In Hebrew, XXXX XXX means the man of the Spirit, that is, he who boasts
of the Spirit, who boasts that he has the Holy Spirit. Micah calls
\[Cap. 2, 11. in Hebrew) the lying and false teachers \"men who walk in
the Spirit\" or in the wind. But in this passage the verb \"walk\" is
missing, so here is another meaning.

However, it must be noted here that the prophet explicitly states that
the godless teachers are punishments of sins and signs of the highest
displeasure 1) on the part of God. In contrast, godly teachers are a
glorious testimony of God\'s mercy and grace. Therefore Paul calls the
apostles, evangelists and prophets \[Eph. 4, 11.\]

1\) Erlanger: inäiAnitalioQSlli instead of: inäiAriutionsm.

gifts of Christ, who sits at the right hand of God the Father, and Micah
\[Cap. 5, 6.\] compares the teachers of the Gospel to a fruitful rain.

The word XXXXX means hate. But he calls idolatry so, because the Lord
hates it and cannot stand it.

**V. 8. the watchmen of Ephraim kept about my God; but now they are
prophets, laying cords in all their ways through the hostile idolatry of
the house of their God.**

The brevity makes this place dark. I think that the prophet uses here
the figure of the antithesis 2), which we wanted to indicate to the
reader by adding the circumstances of the time. For the opinion is that
the earlier times had right prophets, Elijah, Elisha and others, who
punished idolatry with great courage and taught the right worship. But
the watchmen and bishops who are now (he says) are a cause of error and
ungodliness. For they lay ropes for the people, and invite the people to
idolatry, and defend the ungodly worship with great effort.

**V. 9: They will run away, as in the days of Gibeah; therefore he will
remember their iniquity, and punish their sin.**

Above in the fifth chapter, v. 2, I said about the word. Here it is also
put in the same meaning, that godlessness and the endeavor to deceive
the people have taken such deep roots that the godless teachers cannot
be set right by any admonition. However, I have used a different image
in the translation, which, however, indicates the same meaning.

Thus the word XXXX means to spoil, to falsify, to ruin, to ruin a thing,
but even this we have not been able to render by a suitable word, so we
have indicated the sense: they act wickedly. The Historia of Gibeah is
known from the Book of Judges, Cap. 19, 22. ff. Such an abominable and
terrifying sin

2\) Compare Crull, \"Lehrbuch der deutschen Sprache,\" p. 149.

1266 L. XXIV, 376-378. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1860-1862. 1267

He compares the protection of idolatry, which today, unfortunately, is
quite common in the Church of the Pope. But also we should consider that
people like Eck, Pighius, Wicel, when they defend the masses, the
invocation of the saints, purgatory, indulgences, the merits of works
and other plagues of religion, do nothing better than if they were the
protectors of the most abominable lusts.

V.10. **I found Israel in the wilderness like grapes, and saw your
fathers like the first figs on the fig tree; but afterward they went to
BaalPeor, and vowed themselves to the vile idol, and became as
abominable as their wooers.**

He makes the sin of Ephraim great by mentioning the previous sins, as if
he wanted to say: The people always remain the same. Even in the
wilderness, when they daily experienced my benefits and my wonderful
guidance, they still departed from me and surrendered to the pretensions
and worship of the Gentiles. They still continue in this ungodliness and
cannot be corrected.

Known is the story of the fornication of the children of Israel with the
daughters of Moab in Sittim and of the service of the idol BaalPeor, of
which Jerome thinks that it was Priapus, and the name is certainly
correct, because the Hebrew word Peor means nakedness. That which we
have translated, \"They vowed themselves to the shameful idol,\" means
in Hebrew, \"They set themselves apart to shame or to shamefulness,\"
but we have preferred to indicate the sense. For although the word means
\"to set apart,\" it is really a word that refers to worship, just as
the Nazarenes got their name from the fact that they set themselves
apart, that is, that 1) they did something special in relation to
worship.

XXX But without doubt he calls the idol Peor, a shameful and obscene
image. But this very name also fits the idol, because it is with the
people, for the sake of the service of this shameful idol,

1\) Erlanger: \<4110 instead of: yuoä.

The result was such that it became a disgrace and was even afflicted, as
history shows that twenty-three thousand fell in one day \[Num. 25:1, 9,
1 Cor. 10:8\].

In the word XXXXX there is a common way of speaking for the Hebrews,
because the abstractum is put instead of the concretum, the courting
instead of the courting, the love for the beloved. But he calls
\"wooers\" the idolatrous Moabites, whose worship Israel followed. For
so says Moses, 4th book, 25, 1. ff: \"The people began to fornicate with
the daughters of Moab, who invited the people to the sacrifice of their
gods. And the people ate, and worshipped their gods. And Israel attached
themselves to BaalPeor\" 2c.

But here it is useful to consider how easy it is to fall away from the
true religion, and how great is not only the wickedness of Satan, but
also his power. For the Lord does not say a small thing when he compares
the people of Israel, as they are called out of Egypt, to a bunch of
grapes in the wilderness and to a precocious fig. For he indicates that
this people accepted the words that God spoke to them with great desire
and walked beautifully in the fear of God, so that God took special
pleasure in them, who was especially pleased with the service, the
godliness, the faith, and the calling of this people. For the first
bunch of grapes and the first fig give the gardener extraordinary
pleasure.

But the people, who walked so beautifully in the fear of God and in
faith, fall into the most abominable idolatry, to which the forbidden
unchastity gives the occasion, as history shows, that they, invited to
the sacrifices, ate and worshipped the idol. Hosea said above \[Cap. 4,
11\] quite rightly: \"Fornication, wine and must are maddening,\" that
is, they make people nonsensical, they instill in their hearts either
neglect or contempt for religion, and seduce them to godlessness, as the
example of the Pabst shows quite clearly. For unchastity has followed
the impure life of celibacy, and has also brought about much idolatry.
Therefore Daniel connects these two pieces when he prophesies of the
Antichrist \[Cap. 11, 37\] that he will not respect the God of his
fathers and the love of women.

1268 **L. XXIV. 378-381.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 9, 10-13.
**W. VI, 1862-1868.** 1269

In this passage, we rightly consider our weakness and Satan\'s power and
cunning plots, which careless and negligent people cannot possibly
escape. Constant prayer is needed that the Lord may govern us by His
Spirit. Special care is needed so that we ourselves keep our desires and
evil inclinations in check and do not in any way take our eyes off the
Word. Those who do not exercise this care and also neglect prayer cannot
stand for long, but are suddenly carried away by Satan, and the gifts
with which they are adorned by God, no matter how excellent, are of no
use to them.

Since Paul reminds the Corinthians of this danger, that the apostasy
from the true religion and the fear of God can easily happen, he uses
this history of the people who were fooling in the wilderness, 1 Cor.
10, 8. And Christ did not admonish in vain that we should pray daily
that we would not fall into temptation \[Matth. 26, 41\]. For a fall
happens very easily, as the examples of David, Peter and other saints,
but especially of this whole people show. But the power of the enemy is
immense, while we are indeed, as Panlns \[2 Cor. 4:7\] calls it, earthly
vessels that are broken by a light blow, if we do not take refuge in
humble and earnest prayer, supported by the Word.

**V. 11, 12: Therefore the glory of Ephraim must fly away like a bird,
that they should not bear, nor carry, nor conceive. And though they
bring up their children, yet will I make them without children, that
they shall not be men.**

\"The glory\" he calls, as above, the kingdom and all that this people
had in gifts; this, he threatens, will fly away like a bird. But he
indicates with this image that the defeat of the kingdom cannot be made
good, because if one lets a bird out of the hand, it cannot be seized
again.

What is added is very short in Hebrew: from birth, from mother\'s womb,
from

Conception, but the meaning is undoubtedly that it should neither give
birth, nor bear, nor become pregnant. This must not be understood as if
the people of Israel in captivity should not have the gift of fertility,
because they had to remain remnants until Christ, but that they,
oppressed by constant bondage, will lie low. But also the punishment is
included that the children shall be taken away by an early death.

**Woe to them, too, when I have departed from them!**

Here he speaks of the time of captivity, that they would live hard and
miserable among the Gentiles. And these are punishments of idolatry and
ungodliness, which we will only consider with benefit when we set out on
a diligent study of the Word and repent. For Hosea, no less than John
the Baptist, goes about exhorting the people to repentance, reminding
them that the axe has already been laid to the root of the tree if they
do not amend their lives.

**V. 13. Ephraim, as I look at it, is planted and beautiful like Tyre;
but now must let her children go out to the death-striker.**

Tyre is known both from the histories and from the poems of the pagan
writers. For it was a very famous commercial city, which flourished
there by wealth and power. And although it was destroyed by Alexander,
the conquest was very difficult, and Alexander, which I believe he did
not encounter anywhere else, more than once despaired of the conquest.
Therefore, we must consider it no small price that he compares the
kingdom of Israel to this so rich and powerful commonwealth.

But here learn how great is the misfortune of men. Those whom God had
showered with every kind of good deed, so that they, thus provoked,
might learn to worship and love Him and obey His word, became, as it
were, nonsensical through their good fortune and such great prosperity,
and despised God and His word all the more stubbornly, thinking that
these benefits were not the same as the good deeds.

1270 L. XXIV, 381-383. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1865-1868. 1271

The people said that their idolatry was the reward for their deeds.
Therefore, no matter how prosperous their empire was, it could no longer
exist, but finally perished. But the kingdom of Judah, even though it
was not equal to it in power and wealth, was nevertheless preserved
because the seat of the church was in it. This is how God uses to break
the power of the wicked and to show His strength and power in weakness.

We are also witnesses to the abundant bodily gifts that Germany and
other nations received when Pope\'s reign was in full bloom. We did not
see the Turk raging within our borders. Grain was very plentiful. There
were not so great occasions for revolt and discord on all sides as there
are now. We cannot assume that this happiness comes from anything other
than the immeasurable goodness of God, who does not punish us
immediately according to merit, but gives us room for repentance, and
also invites the ungrateful world to the word and right worship with
many kinds of goods.

But God does little in this way. For just as He said above \[Cap. 2,
5.\] of the kingdom of Israel: \"I will go after my servants who give me
bread, water and wool\", so we still hear today that the blessedness of
former times is praised by the papists as if it had been the reward for
their worship, and therefore they lay all the more stubbornly on
idolatry.

But what will finally happen? Since the punishment of idolatry can no
longer be withheld, the Lord now gives his word to Germany, so that the
godly, before the punishment comes, may learn how to comfort themselves
in common misfortune, which is the punishment of past idolatry. For
these evils also come upon the godly, as the histories of earlier lines
show. But because the godless papists neglect and persecute the Word,
but insist on their idolatry, the punishment will befall them, and
without consolation they will perish, like Israel. But why does GOD
threaten even the innocent infancy with the weapons of the enemy?
\"Ephraim,\" He says, \"must let her children go out to the slayer.\"

Do innocent children have to pay for the sins of their parents? I
answer: It is true that when evil punishments come, they also take hold
of the innocent. Thus Daniel and his comrades, although it was only a
punishment of the wicked, were nevertheless led captive to Babylon. And
when wars or pestilence rage, how many children perish who are still
innocent, that is, who have the forgiveness of sins promised in baptism
and have not yet fallen from grace through sin!

This happens not only for the sake of the example, that the descendants,
warned by the terrible punishments, learn to fear God and flee idolatry,
but also for the punishment of the parents, for whom the death of the
children is more bitter than their own death. Although it seems hard
that the innocent are taken away, nothing bad happens to them, since
their body is otherwise also subject to death. And for this reason it is
better for them to die than to live, because they could not preserve
their innocence if they were not soon taken away by death, for they,
too, would be swept away by the example of the parents, as if by a
torrent, into an ungodly being. Therefore, nothing bad happens to the
children, and the example benefits others, so that they, warned by the
terrible punishment, learn to fear God and flee idolatry.

The children of the Gentiles, who are outside the church, are to be
judged differently, even though they will perhaps be judged more mildly
than adults. But this will be revealed by the life to come. We must be
careful, however, not to assert something that is not revealed by the
Word. But there is a certain revelation of the word about the baptized,
as before Christ\'s future about the circumcised, that they are accepted
by God in grace.

**V. 14: Lord, give them! But what will you give them? Give them barren
bodies and dried-up breasts.**

The meaning is the same as above. Because he does not want that the gift
of fertility is completely denied to them. For the remnant of Israel
remained until the kingdom of Christ; but

1272 **D.** mv. **383-385.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 9, 14.
**w. VI, 1868-1870.** 1273

that they should not give birth as they had given birth until now, where
the born children followed the parents while the kingdom existed, the
worldly regiment, the customs of the fathers 2c. Now the kingdom will
cease, he says, the citizens will be driven from their homes, and dwell
among the heathen in the position of servants; never will they rise,
never will they hold a position in the commonwealth. Therefore, children
will be born to them under different circumstances than they themselves
were born, since they received the kingdom, which was ordered by the
ancestors, handed down, as it were, from hand to hand. But also
according to the word and letter this prophecy is fulfilled, because as
punishment of sin in the fifth book of Moses \[Cap. 28, 18.\] also the
curse over the fruit of the womb is enumerated, that is, that it happens
unhappily and sadly in the birth, that the mothers either give birth
more rarely and more heavily, or the fruit perishes before the time.

But here the question arises, why the prophet wishes this for the poor
people, since we have the commandment that we should also love our
enemies, and Christ Matth. 5, 44. expressly commands that we should
bless those who curse us and pray for those who offend us. You will say,
\"How does this seemingly cruel wish fit with this saying? For although
the sin of the parents deserved this, what was the fault of the innocent
child? How much better it would have been for him to ask that the Lord
would enlighten their hearts by his grace, and that at least the
offspring would not be entangled in the punishments of the parents. The
misery is great enough that one has to suffer a cruel enemy, to be
expelled from the kingdom of the fathers and ancestors, to be deprived
of the right service of God, why then does he ask that the blessing on
body and breasts be taken away from him as well? These are words of the
heathen \[Ps. 137:7\], \"Pure off, pure off, even to their ground.\" The
prophet should certainly have spoken differently; it would have befitted
him to have been moved by such an extraordinary calamity of his people,
and to have wished them better. Now, however, he has forgotten himself,
as it were, and imposes still more misfortune on the afflicted,

since he himself does not grant them these goods that are in the
household 2c.

To this I answer: In this passage two things are to be considered, just
as two different persons are held up to us, namely the profession of the
holy prophet and the sin of the people. When Christ preaches Matt. 5:20
ff, he does not refer to a particular and specific profession, but as
the holy ten commandments are a very general law, so he indicates that
all are obligated to love. Love, however, does not permit anger, strife,
wishing evil, striking back, or revenge for insults, but commands that
one should love one\'s neighbor, even one who has wronged us and is an
enemy. Therefore, whoever does not show this love in a pure and genuine
manner on all sides, transgresses the holy ten commandments. In this
passage, Christ rightly condemns anger, evil curses, angry gestures,
strife, revenge, and swearing. For what else could he do, since the holy
ten commandments are a general law that is laid down for the whole human
race?

But God, who has subjected all men to one and the same law, makes
distinctions among men according to their profession. He does not want
the king and his subjects, parents and children, lord and servant,
commander and soldier, to have equal authority. Therefore, he commands
the children to honor their parents, that is, to obey their command; he
does not give the children the power to rule over the parents, indeed,
he commands that the parents should resist the will of the children even
by force. Therefore, parents are not only allowed to be angry if the
children do not do their duty, but also to lay hands on them and to
correct them with blows. And yet they do not transgress the fifth
commandment, but do according to their profession, and would be
disobedient to God if they did otherwise, as the Lord says of Eli, 1
Sam. 3:13: \"I will be a judge of his house for his iniquity, because he
knew that his children did corruptly, and saw not that they did so.\"

Thus, the authorities have the right to decide on the er-.

1274 L. XXIV, 38S-387. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1870-1873. 1275

The people of the country are the children who despise the authority of
their parents, or even injure them. But as the rule of the authorities
extends farther, so also their punishments are more severe than those in
the household, for they have power over life and death. Therefore it is
not said of the authorities that they act against the fifth commandment
when they hang thieves, when they cut off the heads of murderers. For it
has the special profession by which it is commanded to do what others
are forbidden to do.

In this way, we must answer in relation to what the prophet does. He has
a special calling. He is not commanded to speak to the people of Israel,
not to pray for them, as others do, but he is commanded by God to curse
this people and to wish them evil. Since he does this, he does not act
contrary to Christ\'s teaching, which does not have an individual
profession in mind, but rather, in general, as the law is a general one,
it prescribes what all must do who do not have their particular and
specific profession. The prophet, however, has his special calling, and
since he carries it out, he does right.

In this way one can answer with reference to the other sayings \[Matth.
5, 39. 34.\]: \"You shall not resist evil\"; \"you shall not swear in
all things.\" These sayings are all general, as the law is general,
therefore those must not resist evil, must not swear, to whom it is not
permitted by a special profession. But the authorities are a guardian of
good discipline, to honor the good and to punish the bad. Just as the
authorities have the right to punish, so they also have the right to
establish courts and to enjoin oaths. Those who have to do with the law
do so at the command of the authorities, who are ordained for the sake
of protecting the good and punishing the guilty. Those who confirm their
testimony in a doubtful matter by an oath do so by order of the
authorities, and do not sin. Therefore, this is to be considered a
public and lawful vengeance, not a private one, because it is exercised
by the authorities, who want the unjust to be denounced and accused.

does not want their wickedness to be strengthened by covering or
carrying.

But afterwards Christian patience has a place, if the right, which you
seek, cannot be obtained and preserved. And also Christ does not impose
anything else on his own. For since he did not come to abolish the law,
he does not want to abolish the worldly rule, as can be seen from other
sayings of the Scriptures.

Therefore this is the answer to the presented question: Christ speaks in
the fifth chapter of Matthew generally of all private persons. But he
does not abolish the special profession, as he certainly does not
abolish the vengeance of the authorities. But the prophet has a special
profession, therefore he does not act against Christ\'s commandment,
since he rightly curses the people, because this is commanded to him by
God.

But one must also consider the sin of these people. It is of such a
nature that even if one thinks that one should not wish them evil, one
cannot pray for them. The merciful God acts in this way with sinners,
instructing them by His word about His will, condemning idolatry, and
exhorting them to repentance. He commands this office to certain people,
because he does not want to speak to us through angels, as he did to
Moses, nor, as at the baptism of Christ, through his voice from heaven.
But since the wicked reject and persecute the word, and when they are
admonished only persist in their idolatry, what more can be done by us?
Shall we pray that God will strengthen their power, and not rather that
he will come as the righteous judge and destroy the wicked from the
earth, who only deal with all being entangled in their ungodliness.

The papal crowd today not only does not allow the word, but hates and
condemns it in a cruel way. And not only are abuses not stopped, however
obvious they may be, but every day new beautiful appearances are
invented with which the godless being would like to be adorned. What is
to be done here? We have taught in the hope that they should mend their
ways; daily we also pray for success for the Word and against Satan\'s
lies. But

1276 **L. XXIV, 387-389.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 9, 14. 15.
**W. VI, 1873-1876.** 1277

The more diligently we teach and the more fervently we pray, the angrier
ungodly men become, doing, undertaking and trying everything that seems
to serve the downfall of our teaching and the spread of their idolatry.
Shall we then pray that they may prosper, that they may have peace from
enemies? that they may not be deterred by any punishments? since it is
certain that they would abuse their prosperity to the dishonor of God,
and of peace to the extirpation of the churches that keep the pure
doctrine and the right worship.

Yes, rather we are to pray that God\'s name be sanctified. We know that
this prayer will be answered only when the Lord overthrows the
protectors of ungodliness and dampens them with misfortunes of all
kinds, so that they cannot accomplish what they have undertaken with
such great zeal.

Thus, the prophet can also be excused if one considers the sin, since
the sanctification of the name of God must be more important to him than
the welfare of his people. He would like the people to prosper, but
since this could not be done in any other way than by constantly
blaspheming the name of God, since they do not want to be reformed by
the word, he would rather that his people perish than that God\'s honor,
the word and the right service of God be endangered. In this way Moses
prays \[4 Mos. 16, 15\] against the rebellious Korah and his comrades,
and Jeremiah is forbidden \[Jer. 7, 16\] to pray for the people, and
John says \[1 Ep. 5, 16\] that there is a sin unto death for which one
should not pray.

If you raise the question: Where is the Holy Spirit, who is a spirit of
love? Where is love? Because that is how the protectors of the Rotten
answer us nowadays, the answer is: Sin is such that it excludes all
love, because our first concern must be for the name of God, and only
then comes the welfare of others. If one of these two must perish, then
may the pope perish, may the godless authorities perish, may the
protectors of godless doctrines perish, may

1\) Erlanger: nuNus instead of: nuHis.

the whole world will perish, and God will receive his glory, his word,
his church, his worship, amen.

**V. 15 All their wickedness is done at Gilgal, there I am an enemy to
them.**

We have said about Gilgal at the end of the fourth chapter \[v. 15\]
that it was a very highly respected place because of the memorial of
twelve stones, which the Lord ordered to be erected there to commemorate
the amazing miracle that the Jordan stopped its course while the people
were passing through; likewise that the people, who were born in the
desert, were circumcised there and celebrated the second Passover. For
then the people first began to eat that which had grown on the ground,
while they had used the heavenly manna for forty years.

God wanted all this to stand as special testimonies of His goodness to
this people and also to be seen by the descendants, so that they,
reminded by this, would trust in the goodness of God and learn to fear
Him. For so says the text Jos. 4, 22. 24.: \"This you shall teach your
children, that all the nations of the earth may know the hand of the
LORD, how mighty it is; that ye fear the LORD your GOD always.\" And
therefore also the LORD himself gave the name to the place, and called
it Gilgal, because there he had turned away from his people the reproach
of Egypt, or, as the word \[XXX\] is, rolled it away, that is, that he
had commanded the people, who were uncircumcised, and therefore like the
Egyptians and other heathen, to be circumcised there, and had received
them into his covenant.

And this is what the prophet actually has in mind here, when he says:
\"All their wickedness happens at Gilgal, there I am an enemy to them.\"
As if he wanted to say: O! how much the place has changed against the
one who has the name of sin removed and rolled away, since now the
people heap up sins by idolatrous worship. Therefore, just as God loved
the people who came through the Jordan, He now hates and detests this
one.

2\) In the Latin editions erroneously: 86xti, probably by confusing
Gilgal with \"Gilead\", Cap. 6, 8.

1278 xxiv, 389-391. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 1876-1878.
1279

Thus we are taught by experience that what we Germans say in Proverbs is
true, that the devil tends to build a drinking house where God has a
church. For the Oter, which were the most famous because of religion and
the glorious works of God, Satan always defiled with the most shameful
idolatry, until he even turned the temple itself, in which God wanted
his worship to be preserved, into a pit of murder and made the holy land
the dwelling place of the most godless people. Greece had the
best-ordered congregations, and there were bishops there who were
distinguished by scholarship and godliness; now the cruel Turks
entangled everything in the hideous godlessness of Mahomet. Thus at Rome
there was a very great multitude of the holiest people, all of whom
proved with their lives and blood their zeal and love for the true
religion. Now there reigns \"the man of sin\" \[2 Thess. 2, 3.\], the
Antichrist, who from there, as from a castle, has challenged the true
religion for many centuries, pouring idolatry and manifold superstitions
over the whole world.

But such examples teach us about the immense wrath of God, which tends
to follow the contempt of the word and certainty. Therefore, we should
learn to use the word sacredly, not to snore safely, as if the enemy did
not prepare any reenactments for us. He is truly careful on all
occasions, and usually causes tremendous evil from very small
beginnings. Therefore, we must watch carefully and not disregard any
occasions; the beginnings must be resisted, for the histories testify
that from small beginnings the most dangerous discord has arisen in the
church, and that idolatry has been advertised to men even under the
appearance of sanctity.

For that I say of the present place, the false prophets persuaded the
people that their ancestors had sacrificed in Gilgal, therefore it could
not be blamed if they themselves also sacrificed there. The reason is
acceptable on the face of it, but to him who is attentive to the word
which says that Jerusalem is the place for the sacrifice of God, it is
not acceptable.

service, it is easy to see that the services performed in Gilgal were
nothing but idolatry. Therefore, God pronounces at this point that He
has an abomination both for their sacrifices and for the authors of the
sacrifices.

In the New Testament, no specific place is designated for the services.
The children can be baptized at home, if the matter requires it, or in
the church; under the open sky or under a roof. The place, even the
person who performs the baptism, does not give anything to the baptism.
Thus Holy Communion is properly administered to those who wish to
partake of it, whether in the home or in the church. Only one thing is
required, that all trust be based solely on the Son of God, who gave
himself as a sacrifice for our sins and reconciled us to God. Where this
trust is present, all works of the profession are pleasing to God, even
those that seem to be the least. But if this trust is not there, God
hates and detests even the most holy and difficult works to perform, if
they are to be considered a service of God; according to the rule:
\"What does not come from faith is sin\" \[Rom. 14, 23\].

**And I will also cast them out of my house because of their evil
nature, and will no longer show love, for all their princes are
apostates.**

\"Their evil nature\" he calls idolatry, which is devised by men without
the word. But this is a very harsh word, that God threatens to expel
them from the house, because until now the people of Israel had been the
household of God, as it were. For although there was an infirmity in the
service of God, and it maintained idolatry, it was nevertheless visited
by the Lord through the prophets. When they did not care for them and
continued in idolatry, the Lord threatened that they would be cast out
of the house as disobedient children, that is, that they would be taken
away as captives from the land of promise, which had been given to them
by the Lord, among the Gentiles, without any hope of

1280 **L. XXIV, 391-393.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 9, 15-17.
w. **VI, 1878-1881.** 1281

Return. For this is what he says, \"I will show them no more love.\" For
he speaks only of corporal punishment. This did not cancel the promise
of future blessing through Christ, as other testimonies show.

The word \[XXXXX \-\-\-\-- \"apostates\"\] which he attaches to the
princes means sedition, as he says above \[Cap. 4, 16.) Israel XXXX XXX
called, a cow that cannot be tamed and shakes off the yoke.

But it is easy to see what he punishes the princes for, namely, that
they, proud of their power, did not respect the word and wanted to be
higher than the word, as the examples of the godless kings show, who
persecuted the prophets with tremendous hatred, who made known the right
worship and the pure doctrine. Wherever godlessness finds such patrons,
religion fills up completely, and punishment can no longer be withheld.
But this punishment always hits the tyrants harder than the common man,
as the examples show. And the reason for this is that the authorities
are to be the guardians of the whole law, that is, they are to take upon
themselves the care of religion, to ward off idolatry and godless
teachers, and finally also to put an end to other offences against the
second table. Not only did the kings of Israel not do this, but they
were also instigators of idolatry for their own people and kept their
subjects from the right worship by force.

**V. 16 Ephraim is smitten; her root is withered, that she can no more
bring forth fruit. Though they bear, yet will I kill the dear fruit of
their womb.**

He interprets what he said above \[v. 15\]: \"I will no longer show them
love\" and compares the kingdom standing in high blossom to a tree whose
root has withered. Not only does no fruit come forth, but not even any
leaves.

Of the \"killing of the fruit of the body\" we have said above \[v. 11.
f.) that thereby the constant bondage among the Gentiles is indicated.
But this punishment is also carried out, as the letter sounds, that the
best

heads have been taken away before they reached maturity.

V. 17. **My God will reject them because they will not hear Him; and
they must go astray among the Gentiles.**

This is a noteworthy saying, and worthy to be written on all walls: \"My
God will reject them, because they do not want to hear him,\" 2c.,
because it reminds us that if we want to keep the blessing of the Lord,
with which he has adorned us, we must hear him, that is, that we accept
the word and follow it with all diligence. For God will make glorious
those who honor Him, whereas those who do not honor God, that is, who
would rather follow their thoughts than the word of God, will be XXXX

XXXX, that is, \"they must go astray among the Gentiles.\"

Now the truly miserable example of Hungary is before our eyes, which the
enemy, notorious for barbarism and godlessness, devastates and either
strangles the old inhabitants with the sword or leads them away to
distant places, where they live as miserable people without any hope of
a certain residence. For this is what the Hebrew word means. But it is
not necessary to search far for the cause of this misfortune, for it is
indicated by the idolatry that has been in use for so many years, not
only by the negligence but also by the extreme impiety of the bishops
who have zealously protected idolatry.

Therefore, those to whom God has kindled the light of His Word should
see to it that they cherish it with all diligence, that they cherish
this great gift and walk worthy of it, otherwise we too will fall into
the same misfortune. The people of Israel undoubtedly also had other
vices, as Hosea also indicated above, and Micah punishes their tyranny,
avarice, injustice and unchastity. But the prophet only remembers this
sin that they do not want to hear God when he speaks to them, because
this is such a sin that it destroys whole kingdoms.

[1282 k. XXIV, 393-395. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1881-1881. 1283]{.underline}

**The tenth chapter.**

**V. 1. Israel is a desolate vine, its fruit is just so.**

This is a common image among the prophets, that they compare the holy
people to a vineyard, because of the holy and GOtte pleasing fruits,
which follow the words of GOtte. But just as Isaiah \[Cap. 5, 2.\^ and
Micah \[Cap. 7, 1.\] complain about the people of their time, that
instead of grapes there grow heaplings, so Hosea compares the people
here to a desolate vine, on which no grapes are to be seen, because, as
he said in the previous chapter, they do not want to hear the Lord. For
just as the word as a fruitful rain is never taught without fruit, but
always awakens some to the fear of God and to faith, so without the word
there can be no true fruit. For what can reason accomplish that does not
have the Word? It does dream of a zeal for godliness, and is not
negligent in arranging services. But God does not want to be worshipped
in the way that seems good to us; he wants the word to be heard and for
us to do what he has commanded, not what we think is good or difficult
and costly.

Thus, in the kingdom of Israel there was a great and special zeal for
religion, just as in the papacy there are difficult and precious
services. But since these services were performed without the Word, God
condemned them, for, as Samuel says \[1 Sam. 15:22\], He holds obedience
higher than burnt offerings.

In Hebrew the words are set somewhat differently: Israel is a vine made
empty or plundered; its fruit will be made like it or will be like it,
that is, as the vine is, so will the fruit be; the vine is plundered,
therefore no grapes are found there. Isaiah, cap. 24, 1., used this
word: \"Behold, the LORD.

**XXXX XXXX** makes the land empty\", that is, he lets it be desolated
by the enemies, so that nothing

remains; as he then adds: \"and makes it desolate.\" Likewise Jer. 51,
2:

XXXX-XX XXXX, they shall plunder the land, make it empty. Thus Hosea
compares the people in this passage to a vine that is not barren, but
whose fruit has been cut off. For both by the examples of ungodly kings
and by the ungodly teachings of false prophets, the people were
devastated, that they served not their god but rather idols, as the
prophet now adds:

**As much fruit he had, so many altars he had made; where the land was
best, there they endowed the most beautiful churches.**

God wanted there to be only one altar in this people, on which the
sacrifices were to be made, and that the people prove both their
obedience and their gratitude to God. But, he says, Israel does not
respect this altar; everywhere in the land it has erected a tremendous
amount of altars. GOD also forbade that image pillars be set up to
sacrifice at the same; but Israel, where the fields were most fertile,
built both image pillars and churches at great cost. So we see also in
the papacy that \"there\" where are the richest fields and the greatest
abundance of all things, are the richest monasteries and foundations of
the missal monks. This is what idolatry always does; it has the belly as
its god, which it worships and adores.

In Hebrew there is a lovely image in the words XXX 1) and XXXX. And with
the verb XXXXX the prophet looks at the noun XXX to indicate that the
Israelites founded the churches for the sake of it, so that they
rendered a service to God and did something good.

**V. 2. Her heart is divided.**

Some refer this to the discord that has arisen from the diversity of
worship services, like an extraordinary hatred

1\) In the editions: derod kstob.

1284 L. XXIV. 395-397. interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 10, 2. 3. W.
VI. 1884-1887. 1285

between the different monks, as each one exalted his sect without
measure. But it is more appropriate to refer it to the highest
commandment of God, Deut. 6, 5: \"You shall love the Lord your God with
all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your strength. For God
does not want a part of the heart, but the whole heart. But the
idolatrous have a divided heart, since they do not sleep on the word
alone, but go after their pretensions. Until now he has told the sin of
Israel, now he adds the punishments.

**Now shall she find her iniquity; her altars shall be broken down, and
her churches shall be desolate.**

Some interpret the word XXXXX at this point: they will be destroyed, but
it means to be in debt. And it has a special emphasis in this place,
which we have indicated by a paraphrase. For this is peculiar to the
idolaters, that they do not only firmly hold that they please God, but
that they also condemn those who follow a doctrine and worship different
from theirs. Since the Israelites could not be persuaded to believe that
their worship was displeasing to God, but defended it with fire and
sword, as the papists do today, the prophet threatens that they will be
convicted by punishment that their worship is displeasing to God;
otherwise he would not allow the altars and churches to be destroyed by
the Assyrians if he approved of them. Likewise, one would like to say
that poor Hungary is now convicted that God does not like the seven-year
vows to Aach 1), since it is devastated by the Turk.

V. 3. **Then they must say, \"We have no king, for we do not fear the
Lord, so what can the king do for us?**

Truly, the idolaters will not say this, otherwise they would repent, and
as they have

1\) Compare Cap. 2, 6. Here, both the Wittenberg and the Jena editions
have: ; only the Erlanger

has: UHUU8.

If they confess that they have not feared the Lord until now, they would
begin to fear the Lord now and would think of serious correction. But
what they think and do, the prophet will teach us immediately. Now what
is the opinion of this passage? For the words of the prophet are clear:
\"Then they must say, We have no king\" 2c.

I answer: We must look at this according to the heart of the wicked. God
sends the punishments with the intention that we should recognize our
sins and mend our ways. And the feeling of wrath and punishment also
forces the ungodly, as those who have condemned themselves
(αυτοχατάχριτο*ί,* as Paul calls them), to condemn themselves and their
deeds, and yet to persist in such an ungodly way that they do nothing
less than what they have done.

Look at our papists. Now poor Hungary, as I have said, is almost
entirely swallowed up by the Turks. The neighboring countries see what
they have to fear, and cannot deny that this is the wages of
godlessness; and yet, how 2) rare are the princes and bishops who mend
the deficiencies of the churches, who see to it that their subjects have
godly teachers, that the administration of the sacraments is done
according to Christ\'s institution, that the idolatry is done away with,
which is done with the invocation of the saints, with the worship of
images 2c. Thus the wicked do both; they see that their sins, as they
deserve, receive their punishments, and yet they become no better.

In this way the prophet speaks here of the people of Israel: It will
happen that you will have no king to defend you. 3) For Hosea, the last
king, immediately accepted the conditions set for him by the Assyrian;
and after violating them, he was besieged in Samaria, and at last was
taken captive, Samaria being conquered in the third year. Then
misfortune will convict you that these are the punishments for putting
off the fear of God from you.

2\) Erlanger: quod instead of: yuana.

3\) Erlanger: dekendnnt instead of: deksodat.

1286 L. xxiv, 3V7-400. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
i887-isso. 1287

that is, that you have not followed the word, but have done contrary to
the word. For to fear God is nothing else than to pay attention to His
word and to take care that nothing goes against it, whether in worship
or in life and morals. And yet no true improvement has taken place. For
hear what, as the prophet says, has followed.

**V. 4 They swore in vain, and made a covenant; and such counsel grew
green upon all the furrows of the field, as gall.**

Known is the Hebrew phrase XXXX

XXXX, they speak words, instead of: they counsel fearfully, as Isa. 8,
10.: \"Decide on a council, and nothing comes of it; converse, and
nothing exists.\" This is what the idolaters do, who have thrown away
the word and hold fast to ungodly worship, so that even when they feel
that God is angry, they still do not repent, do not change anything in
their usual worship, but resort to human help, deliberate, and try to
get out of their misfortune without God, but in vain. For even wisely
counseled things have an unhappy outcome if we counsel without God, that
is, if we rely on our wisdom and power and do not repent, \"such
counsel,\" as the prophet says here, \"greets all the furrows of the
field like gall. But he calls \"counsel\" this very counseling without
repentance, to which they are forced by the misfortune that oppresses
them. This, he says, brings forth nothing but poisonous gall, that is,
it only irritates God even more and is the cause of even more terrible
punishment.

The word which we have rendered by \"gall\" is called XXX in Hebrew,
which does not mean gall, but a herb. For why else would the prophet add
something about the furrows in the field? And also from Moses it appears
that it is a herb, Deut. 29, 18. where he says: \"Lest there be a man,
or a woman, or a servant, or a tribe among you, whose heart hath turned
from the LORD our God this day, to go and serve the gods of these
nations, and perhaps become a

Root among you that bears gall and wormwood.\" But Moses has here the
trouble in mind, like Paul in the \[first\] epistle to the Corinthians
\[Cap. 5, 6.\], where he says that a little leaven acidifies the whole
dough. Thus Moses says that the danger must not be despised; if there is
even one idolater in the whole nation, he will be like a root of gall
and wormwood, which is exceedingly fruitful, and fills the whole field,
if it is not plucked up in time and by the root.

Hosea undoubtedly looks at this passage and indicates that the people
are like a field that has no cultivator, completely corrupted by
idolatry and ungodly opinions, and therefore they cannot escape extreme
punishment.

The commentators of the Jews add that this herb is poisonous, therefore
some have translated it by hemlock. Although this may not be correct, it
indicates the species, namely that it is a herb that has been called by
this name, and not gall.

Just this word XXX is used in the 69th Psalm, v. 22, where it is
prophesied of Christ\'s suffering: \"They give me gall to eat, and
vinegar to drink in my great thirst.\" Therefore, \"gall\" must be taken
for a herb in that passage also. And it is probable that this happened
among the Gentiles, that they gave gall mixed with vinegar to those who
were condemned to death, so that they might die the sooner. Therefore
the evangelists explicitly add that Christ tasted it but did not want to
drink it \[Matth. 27, 34\]. For He suffered, not forced like others, but
according to the will of God and His will, and did not wish, overcome by
the pain, to end His life sooner than was required by the law of nature.

**V. 5. The inhabitants of Samaria provide for the calves at BethAven.**

About BethAven we said above \[Cap. 4, 15.\] that the prophets called
BethEl by this name because Jeroboam had erected a calf for idolatry in
this place. Just as the people in the wilderness wanted a golden calf to
be given to them, so the prophets called it BethEl.

1288 s. **XXIV. 400-402.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 10, 5. 6.
**W: VI. I8W-I892.** 1289

because the calf service was common among the Egyptians, as also the
histories of the Greeks testify, and the Apis or Epaphus, the calf,
which the Egyptians worshipped as a god, is carefully described by
Herodotus in the third book, in the history of Cambyses: so 1) Jeroboam
also, because he had lived for a time among the Egyptians as an exile,
having been chosen king, had brought the worship of the Egyptians into
the kingdom of Israel, that he might fortify the kingdom for himself
when the people did not go up to Jerusalem for the ordinary worship, and
that in this way he might also make the Egyptians his friends. For
equality of worship is no small bond among men, as against it
diversities of worship excite hatred.

But someone might wonder how Jeroboam could have done this, since the
history of the desert was known to this people, where the calf service
had not only been publicly condemned, but also the people had been
punished because of it, and twenty-three thousand people had been killed
by the Levites in one day according to the will of God. This history was
also known to the common people, so it is astonishing that Jeroboam
dared to reintroduce the long-rejected worship and that the people
allowed it. But this very example reminds us that nothing so
inconsistent can be taught that people, if they are without the Word or
do not pay attention to the Word, should not approve and accept,
especially when godless princes do it and their example is added.

But no doubt Jeroboam defended his actions in a similar way as the
papists today defend their godlessness and idolatry, saying that we, who
are fewer in number, follow new doctrines that were not known long ago.
Thus Jeroboam and the priests of the calves, the Camarim, ridiculed
Judah for keeping its peculiar worship among all the peoples and
kingdoms of the whole earth. As the kingdom of Egypt was the most
prosperous, so it was the most ancient. In this one this calf service
was so

1\) Erlanger: In instead of: it\".

The kingdom has been in prosperity for many centuries and has been
approved by God, otherwise it could not have been in prosperity for so
long. Its great wealth, peace, power, dignity, was the reward of its
godliness 2c. Persuaded in this way, the common people approved of the
calf service, not unlike the papists now defend the impiety of the
masses, the celibate state, the vows 2c. with the length of time, long
habit and benefit.

But what was the end of it at last? How did Israel fare above the
service that had been introduced from Egypt? Of course, Samaria, the
capital of the kingdom, was in the greatest danger and was besieged and
finally conquered by the king of Assyria.

The word means both, to be in worry or fear and to be in exile.
Therefore, it would not be entirely inappropriate if it were also taken
here for: to be in exile. The citizens of Samaria will go into exile
because of the calves in BethEl, that is, the sin of idolatry will be
punished with eternal banishment.

V. 5. 6. **for his people mourn for him, over whom his Camarim used to
rejoice because of his glory; for he is led away from them. Yes, the
calf was brought into Assyria as a gift to the king of Jareb.**

Not only Samaria will be in fear and danger, all the people will mourn
because of the ungodly calf service, that is, they will be afflicted
because of idolatry. Even the Camarim, the priests of the calf, to whom
this service brought much profit and honor, will mourn. For the enemy
will lay waste the kingdom, carry away the idols, and at the same time
carry away captive to Assyria the priests and the people. But they got
the name \"Camarim\" from the fervent zeal in the godless service, just
as in the papacy there was a fervent zeal in the highest godlessness,
when the sacrificers dreamed that they changed the bread and sacrificed
God\'s son by their own power. This godlessness alone brought the
highest dignity to the measuring monkeys, and was extraordinarily
profitable, like the calf service for the Camarim. But they too will
mourn when the punishment will seize them.

1290 L. XXIV. 402-404. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.I8S3-I89S.
1291

**So Ephraim must stand with shame, and Israel must walk shamefully with
his nobility.**

The calf, he says, will be sent as a gift to the king at Jareb. But how
will Ephraim be rewarded for this gift? What will it receive? Disgrace,
that is, it will be in danger without help, it will perish. For to come
to ruin is actually to have our hope and trust in help deceived.
Therefore, shame is the reward of all idolaters, for they are abandoned
in dangers and learn that idolatry is the source of all misfortune,
whereas those who put their trust in the Lord and hold fast to the right
worship, even though they cannot be without dangers, nevertheless
experience certain help, as the 25th Psalm, v. 3, says: \"No one will be
put to shame who waits for you.\" Ps. 31:2: \"In thee, O Lord, do I put
my trust; let me never be put to shame.\" Likewise, v. 18: \"O Lord, let
me not be put to shame, for I call upon thee.\" And Ps. 37:18. f.: \"The
pious shall not be put to shame in the evil time.\" But the books of the
prophets are full of these sayings.

**V. 7 For the king of Samaria is gone, as the foam upon the waters.**

Here he explains what he wants to be understood by \"shame\". But he
uses the parable of the foam that runs on the water, not only to
indicate that this kingdom should be scattered like foam, but also to
illustrate the greatness of wrath and misfortune. Nothing is weaker than
the foam; it is carried away with great impetuosity, and cannot rule
over the water, but is carried away by the water. Thus, he indicates,
the king of Samaria will be swept away, and he will not be able to
defend himself against the power of the enemies who rage with great
impetuosity in the kingdom of Israel.

**V. 8 The high places of Aven are destroyed, so that Israel sinned;
thistles and thorns grow on their altars. And they shall say, O
mountains, cover us; and ye hills, fall upon us.**

Above he called BethEl \"BethAven\", here he calls it only \"Aven\",
which means godlessness, as he calls the sin of Israel either the
\"calves\" or the \"churches\". Everything will be devastated by the
enemy and thereafter lie desolate. But the people will be struck with
such terrible misfortune that they will desire what they now abhor,
namely the collapse of their houses, so that they may perish immediately
with their children, spouses, household members and all their own. But
in vain will they desire this, for they will be preserved for harsher
evils. This was the end of the kingdom of Israel and of idolatry and
contempt for the word of God.

Christ uses these words of the prophet when he prophesies about the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, whose causes were the same that
destroyed the kingdom of Israel. And how much more desirable it would be
to perish suddenly than to be a spectator of such terrible woe!
Therefore, let us encourage ourselves to fear God, flee idolatry, adorn
the Word with holy living, and pray, as Christ says \[Luc. 21:36\], that
we may be worthy to escape from all that these histories threaten the
despisers of the Word and the idolaters.

**V. 9. Israel, you have sinned since the time of Gibeah, and they have
continued to do so; but let them not be like the strife of Gibeah, which
was against the wicked men.**

What follows now is somewhat darker because of the images. But as far as
the meaning is concerned, it is certain that this is also connected with
the preceding and belongs to the threat that the kingdom of Israel will
be completely destroyed because of idolatry. And also in the previous
chapter \[v. 9\] the prophet remembers the sin of Gibeah, which is told
in the book of Judges, chap. 19. From that time on, he says, Israel has
always sinned and continued to do so until this day.

In Hebrew person and numerus is changed: \"Israel, you have sinned since
the time of Gibeah, so they have remained\", but we

1292 **L. XXIV, 404-406.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 10, 9-11.
**W. VI, I89S-I8S8.** 1293

have rendered the meaning. 1) But the LORD threatens that they will be
more severely afflicted than the children of Benjamin, who protected the
sin of the Gibeonites. For although almost the whole tribe of Benjamin
was killed because of the sin of Gibeah, they were reconciled to the
brethren and remained among the people of God, and the rest had their
dwelling place in the land of promise. This, says the Lord, will not
happen to the kingdom of Israel; they will be led away captive to
Assyria and never return.

Others explain this passage a little differently, and what the prophet
of Gibeah mentions, they do not refer to the misfortune of the children
of Benjamin, which is somewhat alleviated afterwards, but to the other
tribes of Israel. For these also fought twice with misfortune in a
righteous cause, so that before they could execute the punishment on the
others, they themselves also had to suffer the punishment for the
idolatry that was common on Mount Ephraim for a long time. But the third
conflict was finally happy. In this way, perhaps, Israel could comfort
itself that, though it was sorely afflicted for a time, yet at last it
would come to pass that things would go better with it, as Israel had
twice fought unhappily, but in the third battle defeated the children of
Benjamin. But the prophet says that now they will not fight with such
luck. Although the two views do not conflict, for either threatens
Israel with destruction, the former seems the more appropriate; but the
reader is at liberty to decide which of the two he will follow.

The piece that he adds: \"So against the wicked people happen\", serves
to make the sin great. For if Israel is to be punished more severely
than Gibeah, it follows that the sin is also more severe, while it is
certain that the sin of the Gibeahites was exceedingly severe.

**V.10. But I will chasten them according to my desire, and nations
shall be gathered against them, when I shall punish them for their two
sins.**

1\) This remark refers to Luther\'s Latin translation, the last part of
which reads: \"dabei bist du auch geblieben\".

See what sin does! God\'s nature is such that He desires to help, to do
good, to benefit mankind, but sin changes this will and forces God to be
harsher against His nature, so that He must punish sinners, as He says
here that He delights in the punishments that the pagans will inflict on
stubborn idolaters.

The following piece is translated differently by some, because the word
is interpreted by eyes, others by furrows. Both explanations are
inconsistent. Pagninus 3) has the right one, who says that the word was
derived from XXX, which means sin, so that the opinion is: \"for their
two sins\", that is, because of the two calves at Dan and BethEl, \"I
will punish them\". For he alludes to the similitude of the calf.

**V. 11: Ephraim is a calf, accustomed to thresh. I will ride over his
beautiful neck; I will ride Ephraim, Judah shall plow and Jacob shall
harrow.**

This is a very beautiful saying, although it is somewhat obscure because
of the image. The Jews had a different way of threshing the grain than
we do, because they used oxen for it. These were driven around on the
threshing floor and kicked out the seed with their hooves. This work was
pleasant for the animals, because they were not tied, not with the yoke,
not weighed down with a load, but, they ran around freely and had their
food, according to the commandment of the Lord in the law \[5 Mos. 25,
4.\]: \"You shall not bind the mouth of the ox that threshes\", that is,
you shall not prevent him from eating, if he gets hungry under the
threshing.

Here the prophet looks at this and compares the kingdom of Israel not to
an ox, but to a calf, which has grown stubborn because of its age, and
is not yet accustomed to the yoke, and says: Israel, like a calf, loves
threshing, that is, it loves such work or worship, from

2\) Thus in the Kethib. In the Keri OMUL\" When translated by \"eyes\"
it is derived from PL; \"furrow\" is M\'iL; the correct derivation and
punctation that Luther followed is from PL.

3\) Sanctes Pagninus, a learned grammarian. Compare Walch, St. Louis
Edition, vol. XX, 2107, note 2.

[1294 xxiv, 406-408. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, i8S8-i9oo.
1295]{.underline}

It does not want to follow the word, it chases after the profit and
serves the belly. But what will I do? I will mount its strong neck like
a horseman and ride on Ephraim like on a horse, that is, I will push it,
I will not let it run around freely, but I will force it, like a horse,
to go wherever I want. Of course, against its will it will go to
Assyria, 1) but it will be forced by force.

What he says about Judah\'s plowing refers to the kingdom of Judah,
which at that time was severely plagued by the Assyrian, although it was
not completely devastated.

**V. 12. Therefore sow righteousness for yourselves, and reap love, and
plow differently, because it is time to seek the Lord until he comes and
rains righteousness on you.**

It moves the prophet the simile which he used to add an admonition to
the threat. He threatened the calf or the kingdom of Israel that it
would no longer be used for easy and profitable work, for threshing, but
that it would have to offer its back to the horseman who would force it,
like a horse, to go to Assyria. But of the kingdom of Judah he said that
it would happen that it would have to plow and crush the clods. Although
this is hard work, it is bearable and does not last forever. Therefore,
by this image he indicates that Judah will receive a lighter punishment.
For although it was afflicted by the Assyrians, it was not completely
devastated, but rather saw that by a miracle of God the enemy was
removed, who did not return afterwards, as Isaiah \[Cap. 37, 29\]
promises.

This, says the prophet, happens to you through your fault. Why do you
not pay attention to the word and live holy? Why do you not turn to the
Lord, because it is the time when he can be found? For then you would
escape this calamity and be adorned with many blessings 2c. This

1\) The words: Invitus sank idit in \^ssvriarri are missing in the
Wittenberg.

is the occasion for this exhortation, and it is very much connected with
the threat. But we will elaborate on it, for it is worthy of careful
consideration, since it shows the right way of repentance.

The prophet demands justice and love, as he taught above in the sixth
chapter, v. 6, that love must be connected with the knowledge of God.
But it is known what righteousness is, namely the forgiveness of sins.
For since we are so corrupted by sin that we cannot be without sin as
long as we have flesh and blood on us (according to the saying \[1 John
1:8.\], \"If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
is not in us\"), our righteousness can be no other than that the sins we
have are not imputed to us, but are forgiven, as Paul \[Rom. 7, 4. f.\]
describes the blessedness from the 32nd Psalm, v. 1. f., describes.

We are therefore righteous, not as if we had no sin, for at every moment
we have need of this prayer, \"Forgive us our trespasses,\" but because
the sins we have are not imputed, but rather forgiven for the sake of
faith in Christ. For Christ is the source and origin of this
righteousness. For when sinners, like those in the wilderness, when they
were bitten by poisonous serpents, look at the serpent of brass, when
they firmly believe that Christ has paid the penalty of their sin in his
body, and that God will accept us for his sake, they are declared
righteous, that is, their sins are not imputed to them, and they are
considered righteous. Yes, they are indeed righteous, because their sins
are no longer on them, but on Christ, according to John\'s saying \[John
1:29\], \"Behold, this is God\'s Lamb, which bears the sin of the
world.\"

But as nowadays our adversaries indicate a different way to bring about
righteousness, even inventing a completely different righteousness,
since they claim that it is a nature that we have and not an imputation
\[of foreign righteousness\], so also the Israelites did not believe
that the con-

1296 **L. XXIV, 408-410.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 10, 12.
**W. VI, 1900-1903**. 1297

The prophet is attacking the root of godlessness because he is
commanding that they sow righteousness. Therefore, the prophet is
attacking the root of wickedness, commanding that they sow
righteousness.

But why does he command to \"sow righteousness\"? Would it not have been
enough to say: Make sure that you are righteous? But the prophet here
expressly punishes the doctrine. For what is the seed of righteousness
but the pure doctrine that God is merciful and pardons sin, since He
promised the seed that would crush Satan\'s head and free us from his
tyranny? For it is impossible for this righteousness to be known unless
it is shown by the Word, just as it is impossible for the earth to bring
forth anything good of itself without good seed.

Therefore, the prophet commands the Israelites to pay attention to the
word above all things and to learn what the word declares to be true
righteousness. For when reason comes to the highest, it holds that
righteousness is when one renounces evil and does good. But who does not
see that we are stuck on both sides? For we cannot strip off the flesh,
and it is necessary that you first celebrate good before you can do
anything good. But the hypocrites see neither, and falsely dream that
they are righteous when they do what is not outwardly evil.

But the Scriptures show us another righteousness, and that is that you
know that there is nothing good in you, and that through the beneficence
of the once promised, but now appeared, seed, the evil that is in you,
in your flesh, and in your heart and spirit, and that stubbornly has its
abode there, will not be imputed to you by the merciful Father in
heaven. Evil, which is in you, in your flesh, in your heart and spirit,
and which stubbornly resides there, will not be imputed to you by the
merciful Father in heaven, for the sake of His only begotten Son, who
took our sins upon Himself and made atonement for them.

This righteousness, says the prophet, teach, and do from you the common
opinions, as if by obedience to the law, by sacrifice, and by a good
life, you were to destroy your ungodly

beings. Sin is too great an evil to be cured in this way. It requires
the sacrifice of the Son of God, whom you worship in the firm belief
that God wants to forgive you for His sake. Through this faith, hearts
are cleansed in truth, for sins are taken away, and another fruit,
\"love,\" grows from the seed of righteousness. This fruit reaps,
because it is a right fruit without hypocrisy.

But there is an excellent teaching in the word \"reap\"; the harvest
does not precede, but follows the sowing. If, therefore, righteousness
is the seed, what frenzy, what blindness there is in our adversaries,
that they condemn and reject this seed and urge the people to reap! In
all pulpits are heard glorious praises of good works. These, they
falsely cry, would be neglected by us, while we are everywhere anxious
about this one thing, that we keep the right seed of the church, from
which love grows. But they not only do not treat this whole part of the
doctrine, but do not understand it at all, because, imprisoned by their
opinions, they think that righteousness is not an imputation, but a
condition. Therefore, they only exhort that one should do good works,
but they do not indicate where the ability to do so comes from.

The prophet now keeps a different order in the teaching. He wants
righteousness to be sown; 1) the doctrine of righteousness through
Christ, not through works or our actions, he wants to be taught first,
and shows that after this sowing a harvest will follow, not of such
works as the hypocrites invent, so that they may obtain forgiveness of
sins through them, as in the law there were the sacrifices, the
oblationes, the observance of the legal customs. But in the pabstics
are: the impious sacrifice of the mass, the vows, the celibate life, the
distinction of food, the peculiar manner of dress, the invocation and
veneration of the saints, the worship of images. But the true

1\) Erlanger: keri instead of: seri.

1298 L. XXIV, 410-413. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
IS03-IS0S. 1299

Good works are those of love, which he calls here XXX or good deeds,
because in these the service of God consists.

For all worship consists in these two things: first, that you pay
attention to the word and listen to the Son of God, who preaches of the
Father\'s mercy and love for us, and of his merit. This is the highest
service, which he called \"the knowledge of God\" in the sixth chapter,
v. 6, and preferred it to burnt offerings. Here, however, he calls it
\"righteousness,\" for what else can we do to God but accept the gifts
he offers us with a grateful heart and not turn away from them, as the
Pharisees and hypocrites do in the Gospel.

After this service, the next is to help your neighbor, that is, all
those who need your help. This is the love that Paul calls \"the
fulfillment of the law\", because the whole second table has to do only
with works of love. But just as the world despises the grace that God
offers in His Son, and seeks other ways to forgive sins than faith in
Christ, so it neglects these works of love as easy and small, and
chooses more precious ones that seem more difficult. She does not want
to help those who are in misery with her money and goods, but GOtte,
therefore the godless Jews made many sacrifices. Those of us in the
papacy waste their goods without measure on the decoration of the
churches. But this is not the right way to serve God; he does not need
our gold and silver, the neighbor has need of it. If we help him, God
will receive it as if we had helped him, as Christ says \[Matth. 25,
40.\]: \"Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.\"

But the world cannot be persuaded in the best way, therefore it not only
neglects the salutary doctrine, but also condemns it, and spends great
expenses on trivial things, but neglects the poor, in regard to whom the
Lord has so urgently commanded us that we should take care of them. But
what punishments will follow, we can learn from the example of the
Israelites.

Therefore, this is not only a glorious admonition, but also a useful
teaching that so clearly indicates service against God.

But why does he add: \"And plow differently\"? (Arate vobis sedulo.) As
for grammar, Jeremiah uses the same words, Cap. 4, 3, when he preaches
about the kingdom of Christ: \" Plow yourselves.

a plowing, and do not sow under the hedges. But it is customary among
the Hebrews, when they want to indicate an emphasis, to double the
words. Therefore we have given it sin the Latin translation\] by:
diligent plowing. Jerome has: Innovate vobis novale \[plow yourselves a
new field. But even if one reads in this way, the same sense remains
which Jeremiah indicates when he adds that one should not sow under the
hedges.

For the prophet has in mind the remnants of sin, which also remain with
the godly and are stirred up by the tempter, Satan. For even though they
have received the Holy Spirit through the Word and are justified by
faith, they have received only the firstfruits of the Spirit, but flesh
and blood hold on to the old nature, and if we do not, as Paul speaks
\[Rom. 8:13\], kill business through the spirit of the flesh, the flesh
will quench the spirit.

Christians therefore also need this commandment to plow diligently, that
is, to kill their flesh diligently, to sweep out the old leaven, that
they may be a new dough \[1 Cor. 5:7\], so that, as Paul quotes 2 Cor.
5:17 from Isa. 43:19, everything may be new, but the old may be removed.

Therefore, see if the prophet did not teach his own about the true
religion in a masterly way and yet in wonderful simplicity. For if you
wanted to paint a Christian, how could you paint him with more actual
colors than how the prophet painted him, since he calls him sowing,
reaping and plowing? Therefore, these are his tools: the seed in his
bosom, the sickle in his right hand, the plow in his left, the constant
handling of the word, the love for the neighbor and the killing of the
flesh. In this is the Christian life, and it will happen that those who
are committed in this way to

[1300 **D.XXIV. 413-418.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 10, 12-15.
**W\^I9O5-1S0K** 1301]{.underline}

To practice the field of godliness, to find the Lord who rains down
righteousness, who forgives sins, and who adorns his own with every kind
of spiritual good, according to the words of Christ \[Matt. 25:29\],
\"To him that hath shall be given.\" For it is not fitting for
Christians to be idle; one must work diligently, and the Lord will
assist those who work with his Spirit.

The verb \"to rain,\" XXX, also means \"to teach,\" as in Isa. 28:9: XXX
XXXX \"whom

shall he teach knowledge?\" And also here it would not be inappropriate
to translate: And the Lord shall teach righteousness; but it seemed good
to us to keep the picture which the prophet presents here of the field
and rural pursuits.

One must also pay attention to the idiom in this passage: \"sow
yourselves,\" \"plow yourselves,\" XXX that is, for your good; it will
profit you if you sow righteousness, if you plow diligently 2c.

**V. 13. 14. For you plow evil, and reap mischief, and eat the fruit of
lies. Because you trust in your nature and the multitude of your heroes
2c.**

\"Evil\" should have been rooted out with the plow, but you fortify it
so that it takes root. Out of it have grown exceedingly wicked fruits,
and a harvest of sin followed, for the whole service of God is nothing
but hypocrisy. On this they rely, through this they hope to be safe, but
their hope will lie to them.

\"Heroes\" he calls either the teachers who took the idolatry in
defense, or the kings and princes. For we have often said,

that at the time Hosea prophesied, the kingdom of Israel was very
powerful.

**And there shall be a tumult among thy people, and all thy strongholds
shall be destroyed. Just as Salman destroyed the house of Arbeel at the
time of the quarrel, when the mother fell to pieces over the children.**

The history, which the prophet remembers in this place, is nowhere
present. But he indicates that it was an extraordinary misery, in which
not the sex, not the age, not even the fruit in the womb was spared.
Such a misery, he says, will also come upon you. For so he continues:

V. 15. And **so it shall be with you at Beth-El, because of your great
wickedness, that the king of Israel shall go down early in the
morning.**

He calls here the BethEl, which he had called above BethAven, where the
calf service was caused by the first Jeroboam. For though the whole
kingdom of Israel was laid waste by the Assyrians, yet the LORD willed
that the places which were distinguished by the ungodly services should
be most severely afflicted.

It is well known that he says that the king of Israel should go down
early in the morning, because it indicates that the downfall will happen
suddenly and unawares.

This is the end of idolatry and godless worship, and there is no doubt
that Germany will one day be overtaken by similar misery, if the godless
bunch of bishops and mass priests do not get comfortable with the word
and the right doctrine.

**The eleventh chapter.**

**V. 1. When Israel was young, I loved him and called him, my son, out
of Egypt.**

This is connected with the preceding, for it is a prophecy of the same
content, only that the Lord here, as he has done several times above,
mentions his benefits,

which he has shown to this people from the beginning, so that the
ingratitude of the people will be all the more apparent and the
punishment will seem all the more just.

It is a lovely picture that he compares this people to a baby, which
because of no

1302 L. XXIV, 415-417. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
IS09-ISI2. 1Z03

Age cannot yet go. For it had very small beginnings, as the Lord also
praises this in Isaiah, when he exhorts Cap. 51, 1. 2. He calls them to
look at their origin and compares Abraham to a dry rock, but Sarah to a
well, a tomb or a spring that cannot be reached to draw water from it.

But especially the word \"love\" must be heeded, for it indicates that
all our hope rests on the fact that God is not cruel or a ruthless
tyrant, does not hate, does not discard men, but loves, as we are wont
to love those who are descended from us, not for our gain or their
merits, but because we cannot hate those who are descended from us. For
parents spend both effort and expense on their children. Therefore, if
someone wanted to look at the merit, the children are even a burden for
the parents; and yet they are loved.

In this passage, God claims this natural affection for Himself, since He
says that He loved this people in the beginning and considered them His
son, and therefore called them out of Egypt and delivered them from hard
bondage. And this is the first blessing, that God, as a father, accepted
this people as a son and kindly nurtured and cared for it until it grew
into a very large nation.

Here the interpreters torment themselves in many ways. For they see what
the opinion of the prophet is, namely that he speaks of the people of
the law, which was led over through the Red Sea from Egypt to the land
of Canaan. Therefore, if God called His Son out of Egypt when He killed
all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, the question arises how Matthew
\[Cap. 2, 15.\] could say that this prophecy was not fulfilled until the
child Christ returned from Egypt to Galilee? For if you wanted to
explain the prophet according to the evangelist\'s saying, a whole new
sense would come out. But it is inconsistent that these so great
warrantors should argue against each other, as Jerome indicates that the
emperor Julianus has brought this up to the Christians as a great
shameful deed, and the an

The words of the evangelist are mocked, as if Matthew wanted to deceive
the Gentiles by applying to Christ what the prophet had said about the
ancient people.

But the matter is easy for such people who are not quarrelsome. It is
certain that the prophet speaks of the old people. But he calls it a
son, because he looks at Moses, whose words he wanted to follow here, as
often elsewhere. For thus says Moses, Deut. 1:31: \"The LORD thy God
hath borne thee, as a man doth his son, through all the way wherein ye
walked, until ye came unto this place.\"

Why, do you say, does Matthew draw this on Christ? I answer: For no
other reason than to show that this JEsus, born of the Virgin Mary and
recalled by the angel from Egypt to Galilee, is the true and eternally
born Son of GOD, as once the people of Israel were, who were not sons by
nature but by mercy, called out of Egypt and brought back to the land of
Canaan, which was promised to the fathers, And there is nothing improper
in this conception, for it is not something new or uncommon to make
general out of particular expressions when the events are the same. This
is also what the evangelist did shortly after 1) \[Matth. 2, 17. f.\],
when he transfers the saying of Jeremiah \[Cap. 31, 15.\] to the
lamentation that was caused by the shameful infanticide in Bethlehem.

This is all the more important because Matthew, while the apostles
almost always follow the Septuagint translation, wanted to follow the
Hebrew Bible at this point. For the seventy interpreters have not the
singular, but the plural: Out of Egypt I have called his sons. The
evangelist corrects this error and, according to the power he has, wants
to show by this testimony that this Jesus, who was born of Mary and
called by the angel from Egypt, is the true Son of the eternal God, born
from eternity, therefore this testimony of the prophet fits him much
better than the old one.

1\) Instead of ante in the issues, xost should be read.

1304 **L. XXIV, 417-419.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. II, 1-5.
**W. VI, 1912-1915.** 1305

People who were not by nature but by adoption (adoptione) 1) a son. This
is the simple and right opinion.

**V. 2. But now when they are called, they turn away, and sacrifice to
Baalim, and burn incense to the images.**

Here he begins to reproach them for their disobedience, that the people,
having been brought into the land of Canaan and adorned in many ways by
the Lord, departed from the word and followed idolatry. In Hebrew,
brevity causes some obscurity. The prophet wants one to consider the
contrast. Since Israel was a child and I called it, it obeyed and
followed the one who called it. Now it is also called by my prophets, it
is commanded to stay on the right path, to pay attention to the word, to
practice the right worship. But it does not want to do so, it turns its
face elsewhere, it does not want to hear those who call it, it does not
want to follow them; it neglects me, it serves the Baalim; it despises
me, the living God, and worships the idols.

**V. 3 I took Ephraim by his arms and led him, but they did not see how
I helped them.**

Here you see that the prophet, as I said above, looks at the sermon of
Moses, Deut. 1, 31. The word is formed by

Foot, and means the same thing that we express in German by \"to teach
to walk, to help on the feet,\" to guide, as children are guided by hand
so that they get used to putting on their feet and walking. By this
similitude the Lord shows that he took care of this people with special
zeal and care, so that it grew into a great nation. But what thanks did
they give him? He says, \"They did not notice how I helped them,\" that
is, they did not attribute these benefits to me, they did not thank me,
they did not keep my word, they did not worship me, but turned to their
idols and to the help of the Gentiles. It is therefore a great blessing
that the Lord did not leave them when they were called out of Egypt, but
cared for them like a child and taught them to walk,

1\) Wittenberger: oxtions.

by graciously standing by them everywhere, helping, protecting, blessing
them 2c. But this is not enough for the kind Father.

**I made them draw a human yoke, and walk in cords of love, and helped
them to bear the yoke on their necks, and gave them food, that he should
not return to the land of Egypt.**

Now this is an extraordinary and exceedingly great blessing, that he did
not let this people go according to their desires, as the rest of the
nations did, but bound them with cords, so that they would remain in
their duty. But these ropes are also wonderful, XXXXXX XXX XXXX XXXX,
ropes of a man, with which men, not animals, are used to be bound, and
bands or ropes of love, which are prepared so that love is awakened.

These ropes are nothing other than the law given and indicated to this
people by God, by which they were first commanded to recognize God, that
is, to pay attention to His word, to trust God and to call upon Him.
This is \"a human yoke,\" for man alone was created to learn to know and
praise God, and then to love his neighbor. This teaching is an immensely
great blessing.

In addition to this, the third benefit is that God has become like those
who make the yoke on their necks easy, because he wants to help those
with his spirit who pay attention to the word and practice love,
according to the saying \[Matth. 25, 29.\]: \"Whoever has, to him will
be given.\" For he not only commands what we are to do, but he also
raises up us who are weak by his Spirit, that he may at the same time
bear with us the yoke which he has put upon us.

To this is added the fourth benefit, that he gave them food, that is,
that he also showered this people with bodily blessings, so that they,
irritated by so many benefits, would again show their gratitude to God,
recognize him, obey his words, worship him, finally flee to him in all
dangers through prayer, and not to men, not to the idols of the heathen.
For this is it that he saith, \"That he should not return again into the
land of Egypt.\"

[1306 L. XXIV, 419-421. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
ISIS-1917. 1307]{.underline}

As for grammar, almost all derive the word XX from the verbum XXX, which
means to incline, and we too have followed these and given it: \"I gave
them food.\" But some interpret XX as an adverbium by: in a quiet way,
and take for the future tense I will let them eat in a quiet way. But
since the sense is not different, the reader may take what he pleases.

V. 5, 6 **Thus Assyria has become their king, for they will not repent.
Therefore the sword shall come upon their cities, and shall wear out
their bars, and devour them, because of their nobleness.**

This is now the reward that they despised the so kind GOD and preferred
to follow their thoughts and pretensions rather than GOD\'s word. For
the king of Assyria utterly destroyed Israel.

Note the saying XXXX XXXX XX, \"because they would not turn,\" that is,
because they did not repent and, being admonished by the Word, did not
put away idolatry; for God hates the impenitent and punishes them, but
gives grace to those who repent.

V. 7 **My people are weary in turning to me; and as they are preached
to, so no one rises.**

The word means to be in suspense, to be doubtful. But in this way the
prophet wanted to indicate the immense contempt of the word, as if he
wanted to say: They are convicted of idolatry by the prophets, who
reproach them with my word and indicate the right service of God, but
although they see and know it, they continue in idolatry, despise my
command, and, as rebellious servants are wont to do, are doubtful when
something is commanded to them, whether they also want to carry it out.
For thus the prophet interprets himself, saying that they are called to
the Most High, but that, as if they did not hear and were deaf, they sit
idle, do not rise, do not follow the voice of him who calls.

**V. 8. What shall I make of you, Ephraim? Shall I protect you, Israel?
Shall I not cheaply make thee an adamah, and make thee like Zeboim?**

The history of Gen. 19, 24. is well known, how the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah were destroyed by fire that fell from heaven; and the Lord
threatens the transgressors of the law with the same punishment in Deut.
29, 23. The Lord is looking at this threat in this passage. He says: You
have deserved with your stubborn idolatry that I should cut you off
completely like Adama and Zeboim, but I will deal more mildly with you.
For it follows:

**V. 8. 9. But my heart is of another mind, my mercy is too fervent,
that I will not do according to my fierce anger, nor turn to destroy
Ephraim at all; for I am God, and not a man, and am the Holy One among
you.**

This is a glorious passage that must be set against the thoughts of the
wrath of God. For just as the Law says that God is favorable to those
who obey His will, but threatens the wrath of God to those who deviate
from and forsake the Word, so also our hearts hold that God hates
sinners and wants to condemn them. Therefore, when we are aware of
something evil, we flee from God and fear His judgment, \'just as Adam
and Eve, when they realized that God was approaching them in Paradise,
sought to hide themselves and fled from His sight. They could not
convince themselves that God, after they had sinned, would take care of
them in a fatherly way, forgive them and protect them in the future.
They knew the certain punishment and judged that it could not be
prevented or mitigated in any way.

In this way, all people remember God. Therefore, the hypocrites who
dream that they have done enough to God\'s law are safe, and almost
think that they are sitting in God\'s lap; but God paints Himself with
completely different colors at this point.

The sin of Israel is known from the many sermons of this prophet,

[1308 **L. XXIV, 421-424.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. II, 8. 9.
W. **VI, 1917-1920.** 1309]{.underline}

and the same is sufficiently illustrated by this one threat that the
Lord threatens to inflict the same punishment as on Adama and Zeboim.
And yet the Lord says that his heart is of a different mind and is
inflamed with mercy. What else is this said than that the heart that is
provoked to anger because of the sins of men is not God\'s right heart;
but the right heart of God is that He is moved by our misfortune, that
He burns with compassion, that He brings help to men who are falling
into their ruin, and that He freely benefits those who have earned the
utmost misery. This is truly God\'s being, that He forgives, that He is
moved by our dangers, and that He is eager with great zeal and effort to
help the poor sinners and to snatch them away from the punishments they
deserve.

God had presented death to the first parents as the punishment for
disobedience, for He is not a God who is pleased with ungodly beings
\[Ps. 5:5\]. Although He does not completely remove the punishment from
those who fell into sin and death, He does mitigate it and promises that
death shall be followed by life through the seed of the woman who
crushes the head of the serpent \[Gen. 3:15\].

Now, what is the cause of this unconscionable good deed, that death,
which was imposed because of sin, is annulled by the Son of God, and the
eternal punishment becomes only a bodily one? It is absolutely the same
cause of which God says here that He would be moved by it not to destroy
the people of Israel, who had deserved the punishment of Adama and
Zeboim. For his heart becomes of a different mind, that is, he returns
to his proper way, he resumes the old way, he is not angry without
measure, he is kind, he has a heart that burns, not with anger, but with
love and mercy. Therefore, he casts away anger and follows his nature,
which is good, gentle, gracious and merciful 2c.

But he adds the cause, \"For I am GOD, and not a man, and am the Holy
One in the midst of you.\" This is no different than when he said, \"If
I have mercy, if I pardon, if I am moved by your

If I am moved by misfortune, I do so because that is rightly God\'s.
Therefore, I have said that in this place God is painted with His proper
colors. Whoever has this knowledge of God, even though he has reason to
fear because of his sins, will nevertheless be uplifted and comforted by
trusting in the mercy of God. On the other hand, those who have lost
this knowledge of God must despair like Cain, Saul and Judas.

Therefore, the apostles everywhere exhort the believers to increase in
the love of God, that is, that the hearts should certainly believe that
they are loved by God, and hold up this infallible testimony of this
love, 1) that he did not spare his Son, but gave him to the world, so
that through his death life might be restored to the world. This is the
highest and most certain testimony of God\'s love, as Paul says \[Rom.
8, 32.\]: \"If he has given his Son, how will he not with him give us
all things?\"

But why does he commemorate man here? \"For I am God, and not a man.\"
Of course, in order to show that we are so corrupted by sin that we
cannot keep a measure of anger and vengeance. This irreconcilability
comes from Satan and sin. This evil, he says, I, God, do not have.
Therefore, even though I am angry, I temper my anger, and when I
chastise, I do it with moderation and not in anger \[Jer. 10:24\],
unless men are such that they will not set a measure to their sins. Then
justice demands that such people be restrained, and rather that they be
destroyed than that they should destroy countless people. But if they,
warned by their misfortune, recognize their sins and ask me for mercy,
what else should I do but have mercy and remove all anger from my heart?

This is precisely why he says, \"I am the Holy One among you.\" For just
as he says, \"I am GOD, and not a man,\" for man, being corrupted by
sin, holds no measure in his wrath; but GOD hath

1\) Wittenberger: xroponit instead of: xroponunt.

1340 L. XXIV. 424-426. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1S20-192S. 4311

no sin, therefore he does not let his anger rage without measure: so he
says: \"I am the holy one among you\", as if he wanted to say: You are
not holy, but I am holy among you for this reason, for this reason I
join myself to you, so that I may make you holy, so that I may forgive
your sins, and awaken you to true obedience through my Spirit.

But how does God do this? Certainly through His Word, in which He
instructs us about His mercy and about His love for us, which He made
known by sending His Son. Through this preaching, the Holy Spirit
enkindles hearts to trust in the goodness of God, to be sorry for the
sins they have committed, and to firmly believe that they have been
forgiven and given by the merciful God through His Son; then to come to
wholeheartedly obey God and to subdue the flesh. -Thus God sanctifies us
by dwelling among us through the word of the Gospel of His Son.

The sum of this passage is therefore that the Lord promises that even
though the kingdom of Israel is to be devastated and scattered among the
Gentiles, it will still happen that God will not destroy it completely,
but will call it back in its time to the kingdom of Christ through the
gospel, that he will have mercy on it and forgive its sins or make it
holy. But he adds a strange condition:

**But I don\'t want to come to the city.**

What does this mean? Many things have been drawn here, but it seems to
me that the most simple and the one that best fits the prophet\'s
opinion is that Mari understands that God wants to have mercy on the
kingdom of Israel, which was scattered among the Gentiles, in such a way
that the Israelites should not return to the worldly regime and the
Mosaic church, which remained with the kingdom of Judah until the time
of the Gospel.

Christ uses this very image when He says in the parable Luc. 14, 16. ff.
that those who were in the city were invited to the great supper, but
that the lame, the blind and other miserable people were not invited.

When no one wanted to come, the Lord of the Supper finally commanded
that those who were outside the city on the country roads should also be
invited.

In this way the Lord says here in the prophet: I will bring Israel to
the kingdom of grace, I will sanctify its remnants, but in such a way
that I will not enter the city, that is, I will leave them among the
Gentiles, and among the Gentiles I will have mercy on them. Therefore,
the abolition of the worldly regime and the Mosaic worship is included
here, since the sanctification is promised to those who are outside the
city among the Gentiles, not circumcised in the flesh, not instructed in
the Law 2c.

**V. 10. Then one will follow the Lord.**

This will finally be the fruit that will follow the words of the Gospel
and sanctification, that while they have hitherto walked according to
the desires of their heart, considering their sacrifices, their
ceremonies and other things to be righteousness before God, they will at
the same time throw all this away, and rely only on the righteousness
and merits of the Son of God, of whom they will hear in the Gospel that
He was given up for our sins. For this saying excludes tremendously all
works and services which are not \"the Lord\". As great as the variety
of divine services and works is in the papacy, neither a monk will dare
to call his vows, nor a sacristan his mass, nor a hypocrite his fasts,
nor a rich man his alms by the name that they are \"the Lord.

That he therefore says, \"One will follow the Lord,\" is the same as
saying, \"They will throw away trust in all human works, and rely and
trust in God\'s grace and goodness alone. For whoever believes that
God\'s Son became the sacrifice for his sins, he will not rely on any
work that is his own, for he sees that our works cannot be likened to
the death of God\'s Son. Therefore, he will raise himself up through Him
alone, will stand firm for it-

1312 L. XXIV, 426-428. interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 11, 10. 11. W.
VI, IS23-IS25. 1313

that through him alone he is reconciled to God, has obtained forgiveness
of sins and eternal life. This means in truth \"to follow the Lord\".
And on this faith follows the endeavor to be obedient to the law, for
those who are freed from sins desire to retain this innocence.
Therefore, even if they fall because of weakness, through this trust
they straighten up again and then walk more carefully.

**V. 10, 11: And he shall roar like a lion; and when he shall roar, they
that are toward the west shall be afraid. And they also that are in
Egypt shall be afraid as a bird, and they that are in the land of
Assyria as doves: and I will put them in their houses, saith the LORD.**

The roar of the lion is often cited, more than the voice of any other
animal, because it has the strongest sound and by nature frightens man.
And in general, it emits its roar when it has obtained a prey, as Amos
Cap. 3, 4: \"Does a lion roar in the forest when it has no prey? Does a
young lion roar out of his den when he has caught something?

Therefore, the preaching of the Gospel is compared to the roaring of the
lion, because it is heard everywhere in the whole world, and it is such
a teaching by which hearts are moved, are no longer secure, but look
anxiously for their salvation, as can be seen from the passage Apost. 2,
37. f., where they say to Peter: \"Men, dear brethren, what shall we do?
But Peter said to them: Repent, and be baptized every man for the
remission of sins.\"

In this way the prophet also says here: \"When he shall roar, they shall
be afraid that are toward the evening.\" Likewise the Egyptians and the
Assyrians. For when sure hearts hear that salvation is given only to
those who are baptized and believe in the name of Christ, they are truly
terrified and anxious for their salvation.

But also in this the likeness fits very well, that the lion does not
roar differently than when he has a prey in his claws and tears it
apart. For our Lord Jesus Christ, having conquered death, has conquered
the devil.

overcame and destroyed hell, let this roar of his gospel be heard, as he
commanded the apostles to go to all nations and preach repentance and
forgiveness of sins in his name \[Luc. 24, 47.\].

But why does he use the parable of the birds and doves that are
frightened? For this reason, that he might show, as it were in a
painting, what the state of the world was before this roaring. For
before the preaching of the Gospel, the world was like the birds and the
doves sitting safely in the pasture. For though there are different
religions, yet each holds that he follows that which is true and
wholesome. The worship of the Greeks was different from that of the
Romans, and that of the Egyptians was different from both. For each
people had its own religion, and they were never concerned whether they
were in error or not.

Thus happened what Christ says in the Gospel \[Luc. 11, 21. f.\]: \"If a
strong man keeps his palace, his own remains in peace. But if a stronger
man comes upon him and overcomes him, he takes from him his armor on
which he relied, and divides the spoil.\" As long as the birds sit in
the pasture, they are safe, graze, and do not leave a place so situated
of their own free will, but return daily. But if they suddenly hear the
roar of a lion or the bang of a gun, they forget their food, fly up in
flocks and leave their feed.

In this way, says the prophet, the gospel will frighten the whole world,
move the pagans to rise from their pasture like frightened birds, leave
their idols and religions, and accept the teaching of the gospel.

Look at the time of the pope. Before the gospel of Christ became known,
there were many orders of monks, many services, and indeed each had his
own special ways in which he believed to be saved. For how great was the
multitude of saints, yes, how great the variety of services! And yet no
one thought that he was mistaken; each one thought that he had grasped
what was right; therefore they were like the birds that surely gather
the seeds.

1314 **L. XLIV, 428-430. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1S2S-1S2S.** 1315

But behold, by God\'s special grace the lion roars, the gospel resounds;
we are taught that it is the only sacrifice of Christ on which we should
rely, that everything else is far too small to be able to free us from
even one, even the lightest sin. By this voice Germany is moved, the
monks and nuns throw away their ungodly vows in which they had trusted
until then, accept the Son of God as the sacrifice offered for their
sins, and take a stand in which they can serve their neighbor.

Thus, those who had trusted in the ungodly sacrifice of the mass throw
it away and accept Christ the priest. Those who had hoped for
forgiveness of sins by fasting, pilgrimages, buying indulgences, now
abhor this lying hope and go to Christ\'s sacrifice. What need is there
of many words? The earth has been moved by this roar, and all of us,
like birds that previously sat safely in the pasture, have suddenly
departed from idolatry, terrified, and followed the voice of the right
shepherd, with whom there is no deceit.

But, you will say, what is this voice? Certainly this one, of which
Christ says John 16:8: \"The Holy Spirit will punish the world for sin,
and for righteousness, and for judgment.\" That is, he will punish the
world for sin, for lack of righteousness, for being judged and
condemned. But let it be freed from sin, let it attain righteousness,
let it escape damnation, if it believes in Christ, who has gone to
heaven and is seated at the right hand of God, and has judged or
condemned Satan, as the 110th Psalm says \[v. 1\]: \"Sit thou at my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.\"

This voice of the gospel does not allow any security in the hearts. For
no one wants to be eternally damned, no one wants to be under the wrath
of God. We flee from the wrath of God, and we desire eternal life.
Therefore, all leave, seeing that this way to life is held out to us,

their own ways, from which they see that they will be damned, and step
onto this path of faith, which alone leads to eternal life.

Therefore it was not enough for the prophet to say that before the
roaring those will be frightened who are in the evening, the Egyptians
and Assyrians, but he adds: \"The Lord will set them in their houses\",
that is, after they, thus frightened by the gospel, have left the
idolatry in which they lived safely before, the Lord will assign them
nests in which they can safely dwell. For the gospel not only punishes
the world for sin, but also teaches true righteousness, holds up the Son
of God, who became the sacrifice for our sins according to the will of
the Father, and rose again for the sake of our righteousness. Through
this message, hearts are uplifted, for they see that they are loved by
God, they see that God does not delight in their death, but wants them
to believe and be saved. Therefore, they comfort themselves with this
will of God, and triumph even in dangers and tribulations. For it is a
small thing that they suffer tribulation here for a time; the hope of
eternal life is much more powerful for them; through this they overcome
everything that the world and the devil throw in their way in terms of
troubles and dangers. It is this that he promises that it will happen
that they will dwell safely in their houses, as if he wanted to say: I
will not leave those who are so troubled, I will comfort them and show
them the right way to life.

But you must notice that he calls the Gentiles to the fellowship of the
gospel, as he said before about the rest of the kingdom of Israel,
because he remembers those who are in the evening and in Egypt and
Assyria, where the kingdom of Israel lay captive. It has often been said
that the calling of the Gentiles to the kingdom of Christ includes the
renunciation of the Law and the Mosaic worship, and confirms the
righteousness that does not come from the works of the Law, but from
faith in Christ, by grace, freely.

[1316 **L. XXIV, 430-432.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 12, 1.
W. **VI, 1929-1832.** 1317]{.underline}

**The twelfth chapter.**

**V. 1: In Ephraim there is falsehood against me everywhere, and in the
house of Israel false worship (dolo). But Judah still holds fast to God
(adhuc dominatur cum Deo), and to the right holy worship.**

This is a new sermon, but of quite the same content, for he condemns
idolatry and threatens desolation. For just as a physician, as long as
the disease lasts, does not give up caring for the sick, so also the
prophets, who must heal the church by the word, continue with
exhortation, with rebuke, with threats, as long as they see the wicked
continuing in their sins.

Since Judah is mentioned here as still holding fast to the Lord, it is
clear from this that this sermon is one of the last to be preached at
the time of Hezekiah, who, according to the words of Isaiah and other
prophets, is gloriously restoring the church.

And above we have often said that this punishment of idolatry, which has
been repeated so often, is nowadays held up for the benefit of our
churches, so that we may be all the more encouraged to thank God for His
immeasurable mercy and goodness, so that we, torn out of darkness by the
bright light of the Word, now recognize God and, with the rejection and
repudiation of all idolatry, hold fast to the right divine services. For
this is the source of all good, whereas where the pure doctrine and the
right worship are lost, misfortunes of all kinds and punishments must
inevitably follow. For what good can be expected where there is no
knowledge of God? Where the hearts do not believe that God is kind and
merciful, but that we must earn something from Him with our actions?
Here new services arise without measure, but because they are undertaken
without the Word, God hates and punishes them. But since the poor
people, who are in misery and misfortune because they do not know God,
either call upon Him with doubt, or turn to their own actions and seek
help from men, they continue to fall into disgrace.

and away deeper and deeper into God\'s wrath.

This is the lie and this is the falsehood about which the Lord complains
here, that it is everywhere against Him. For the right services are
those that are done according to the word of God and by the command of
God, for those that are done in humility and with a certain trust in
mercy are pleasing to God. Therefore, when things are distressed, he
brings help and hears when he is called upon. But the more the idolaters
try to please God and to get out of the existing misfortune, the deeper
they fall into wrath and punishment, as the prophet will say soon after.

The \"lie\" is therefore the godless doctrine, and \"falsehood\" the
hypocrisy and the godless worship; how this had been in the kingdom of
Israel, history shows enough.

On the other hand, it is a very great price and comfort for Judah that
it firmly holds on to God, that is, because it keeps the true service of
God, because it has the pure word, it reigns and cannot be oppressed or
completely fall away, although Satan is everywhere bent on showering the
godly with misfortunes of all kinds. On both sides, therefore, the
events are wonderful and unexpected. The godly, because the world hates
them for their confession and for the sake of the word, are in danger
and fear for themselves; but they fear in vain, for they reign with God,
that is, they can no more be oppressed than God can be oppressed, in
whom they trust and on whose word they rely.

On the other hand, the wicked, blinded by the present prosperity, think
that they will be in danger if they accept the true religion, and
therefore they practice wickedness zealously, because they believe that
in this way their power will be strengthened. Jeroboam judged that he
would lose the kingdom if he allowed his people to

1318 L. XXIV, 432-4S4. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
IS32-IS35. 1319

of the divine service commanded by God. The pope thinks that he will
lose his dignity and goods if he approves of our teachings, and sees no
other way to fortify his kingdom than by being obstinately godless. But
what will happen? In this way he brings punishment upon himself and
never-ending misfortune.

In Hebrew, XXXX is XXXXXX-XX, with

faithful to the saints. It seemed most appropriate to us to relate this
to worship. Although by \"the saints\" the Hebrews understand God, this
is simpler. However, he who simply understands the saints as the
sanctified ones or the church is not mistaken, for it comes to the same
thing: that Judah faithfully keep the worship that was observed by the
saints in the holy church, and in the place that the Lord Himself
sanctified for His worship. What follows now teaches what the outcome
was on both sides, namely with the godless kingdom of Israel and with
the godly kingdom of Judah.

**V. 2. But Ephraim feedeth on the wind, and runneth after the east
wind, and maketh idolatry and mischief more daily: they make a covenant
with Assyria, and bring balm into Egypt.**

The prophet has used an excellent image by which he depicts the godless
idolaters of all times. They make grandiose promises of their worship,
and lay hold of it with great zeal, especially when they are beset by
dangers. But this is just as when a hungry man draws in wind with his
mouth. For this hope is not only vain, but the Lord is only more
provoked to anger.

Nowadays Germany recognizes the danger threatening her from the Turkish
tyrant. And no one is so obtuse that he should not see that this is a
punishment of sins. Therefore, those who follow the reputation of the
pope make supplications to certain saints, they impose fasts, they
increase masses and other idolatrous services. In this way they hope to
put an end to the common misfortune and to appease the wrath of God.

can. But in fact they graze on the wind and run after the east wind,
which is harmful because it is dry and cold. Thus the manifold worship
of the wicked is nothing but a lie and increases misfortune.

For there is another way to appease the wrath of God, which the prophet
will immediately remember, namely \[M. 7.\] that we keep mercy and
justice and persistently hope in our God. But the world does neither; it
does not respect mercy and justice, and seeks human help, as Israel
joined with the Assyrians and sought help from the Egyptians. But even
this approach is nothing but a lie and harm, for it deceives the hope of
human help and brings certain harm.

**V. 3. Therefore the LORD will guide the cause of Judah (Lis est domino
contra Judam), and will punish Jacob according to his character, and
repay him according to his merit.**

Above he praised Judah to hold fast to the true God and to keep the
right worship. Why then does he think of a matter of strife? Because the
prophets use this expression \[\"matter\"\] everywhere in an evil sense,
as above Cap. 4, 1. and Cap. 5 1) and Micah 6, 2. I answer: History
teaches us in detail about this, because it is known how it was with the
church before Hezekiah. And when the king of Assyria had carried away
captive the kingdom of Israel, he also afflicted Judah, because of the
sin of Ahaz, the father of Hezekiah, of whom history says 2 Kings 16:2,
3: \"He did not do that which was right in the sight of the LORD his
God, as did David his father. For he walked in the ways of the kings of
Israel,\" and also imitated the godless ways of those at Damascus \[v.
10. ff.\]. Therefore, after other defeats, the kingdom of Judah was also
sorely afflicted by King Sanherib himself, and Jerusalem was besieged.
But the LORD had mercy on the godly king Hezekiah and miraculously
lifted the siege. But Jacob or the kingdom of Israel was completely
destroyed.

1\) This citation will be erroneous, because 2\") does not occur in the
fifth chapter.

1320 **L. XXIV, 434-436.** interpretation of Hosea. (3.), Cap. 12, 3-6.
W. **VI,** ISSS-IM. 1321

But what he adds of Jacob is like the saying of Peter \[1 Ep. 4, 17\]:
\"Judgment begins at the house of God,\" and the words of Christ \[Luc.
23, 31\]: \"If this be done in the green wood, what shall become of the
dry?\" For if the Lord had a cause against Judah, which at that time
held fast the right worship, Jacob had a greater danger to fear, which
even when it had been admonished would not repent.

**V. 4-6. Yes (they say), in his mother\'s womb he undercut his brother
and fought with God with all his strength. He fought with the angel and
was victorious, for he wept and besought him; there he found him at
Bethel, and there he talked with us. But the LORD is the God of hosts;
the LORD is his name.**

He has called the kingdom of Israel with a common name Jacob, and from
this name he now takes the occasion for a very serious admonition. For
he holds up the faith and zeal for the promises of God that was in the
patriarch Jacob, whose name the godless Israelites claimed for
themselves, and he teaches that nothing of the sort is found among the
Israelites. For they performed godless services and did not care for the
Word at all. This I consider to be the simplest understanding of this
passage, and it is very much related to the preceding and the following.

But he praises the faith of the patriarch Jacob by mentioning two
histories. The first is Gen. 25, 22. ff., that when Rebekah, who had
been barren, gave birth to twins in the first birth, Esau came forth
first, but Jacob grasped the heel of his brother in the womb, as if he
wanted to hold him back and envied him the privilege of the firstborn.

Truly, a wonderful history, which the prophet mentions at this point for
the sake of it, so that we do not think that this happened by chance.
For why should he cite an accidental event and connect with it that
which is something most admirable for us, namely that a man had wrestled
with God and yet could not have been overcome? Therefore

indicates that Jacob, while he was still in his mother\'s womb, had an
immense desire and aspiration to obtain the promise that had been made
to the fathers. Therefore, when his brother first came out of the womb,
he tried to pull him back. For it is known that it was the right or
privilege of the firstborn that the promise belonged to him of the seed
that should bruise the head of the serpent. This Jacob strove to obtain,
even while he was still in the womb, as he tried to prevent Esau from
being born first.

You will say, where does such a mind come from in the womb? Certainly
from the Holy Spirit, who enlightened John, a fruit of six months, so
that he recognized that Christ, who had recently been conceived, was
present. For God is not only a God of adults, but also of little
children, even of those who are still in the womb. And what is it to
wonder that the Holy Spirit is active in them in such a way that we do
not understand? Nevertheless, although they have life, flesh and bones,
they are not nourished in the same way in the womb as we are nourished
who live in the light of the world.

Therefore, it is a truly hateful and ungodly doctrine of the Anabaptists
who deny baptism to children because they have no insight and
understanding, nor do they understand what is being done to them. In our
eyes they do not understand, we think that they are without insight and
reason, but in the sight of God, whose work they are, it is not so. For
just as God feeds them in a different way than He feeds us, He also
moves their hearts in a different way. Now if there is no understanding
in Jacob when 1) he is still in his mother\'s womb, why is what he did
mentioned? or what is the use of this mention?

But the prophet contemplates God\'s miraculous work, and praises 2) in
Jacob, when he was not yet born, the special striving and

1\) Erlanger: in \^aeokurn instead of: in ourn.

2\) Instead of pEäicit it should probably be read praeäiont.

1322 L. XXIV. 436-439. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1938-1941. 1323

Desire for the promise of Christ to punish the Israelites who, after the
example of Esau, did not keep the promise of the seed, and in the
meantime supplied their belly.

If you do not want to follow this opinion, what can be the use of this
history, which is mentioned in this place, or how should it not be
inconsistent to connect it with the other memorable history of Jacob\'s
fight with God on this side of the Jordan? Nor does St. Paul add in
vain, but in express words, when speaking of Jacob and Esau \[Rom.
9:11\], \"Before the children were born.\"

The other history is in the 32nd chapter of the first book of Moses.
Just as Jacob, when he was still in his mother\'s womb, wished to obtain
the promise that had been made to the fathers by the blessed seed, this
desire grew stronger with the years through the godly instruction of the
parents and especially the mother, who had received the answer from the
patriarch Shem that it would happen that the lesser should rule over the
greater. And as the history \[Gen. 25, 29. ff.\] indicates, it happened
by chance that the hunter Esau returned to Hanse almost dead of hunger,
and ceded the right of the firstborn to his brother for a food, for
which he was then more eager than for the promise.

Now when Isaac was to depart from life, and was about to bless his sons,
Jacob, by a godly deception of the mother, was put under for Esau, and
received the blessing from the father. This made Esau very bitter;
therefore the mother, fearing that he would follow Cain\'s example, sent
her son Jacob to her brother Laban in Mesopotamia, whose two daughters
Jacob took as wives. When he was finally called back to the land of
Canaan by the Lord, Jacob feared his brother\'s wrath and sent servants
to him to find out what his attitude was toward him. When Esau heard of
his brother\'s arrival, he went to meet him with four hundred armed men.
This news greatly frightened Jacob, for the cause was not known why his
brother was in

would have set out in the company of such a large number.

When he had come to the ford of the Jordan, which is called Jabbok, he
carried his cattle, his servants, his wives and his children across at
night, but remained alone on this side of the Jordan, no doubt to pray
and to command his salvation and that of his family to his God. History
tells us that a man came to Jacob by night and attacked him in a hostile
manner, so that Jacob\'s life was in danger. And the scripture expressly
says that Jacob was in the presence of this man, who also asked him to
let him go. Therefore the name Israel is attached to Jacob, which means
as much as a victor over God, because he was superior to God. This is
approximately what history indicates.

Here note first of all the name Elohim, which means God in the plural,
as is indicated everywhere and especially in the first chapter of the
first book of Moses. But the prophet adds another name at this point and
calls him which means an angel. Therefore the Jews, as they are wont to
do, bring up foolish pagans, and interpret Elohim also by angels. But
the truth teaches us otherwise. For we know that Christ was called an
angel because of the office he was to have in the church and in the
flesh, Gen. 48, 16, Isa. 63, 9, Mal. 3, 1. 3, 1. Therefore it is clear
that this angel, who is also called Elohim, was the Son of God. And
Jacob, who was victorious in this battle, is called Israel because he
overcame God.

In this way, the prophets cover the mystery of the Trinity, and, while
painting a specific person, nevertheless teach that there is only One
God, who is God the Father, God the Son, who is born of the Father, and
God the Holy Spirit, who proceeds from the Father and the Son.

However, one is used to dispute in many ways what kind of fight this
was. But history shows that Jacob\'s life was in danger and he was
attacked with all his might by an unknown enemy; therefore, he used his
physical strength to defend his life against his enemy. However, he did
not fight with strength alone.

[1324 **D. XXIV, 439-441.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 12, 4-6.
**W. VI, I94I-I943.** 1325]{.underline}

His faith also struggled, and he first comforted himself in such
imminent danger with the fact that he was commanded by God to return to
the land of Canaan. After that, he seized with all his heart the promise
that had been made to him at Bethel by the Lord, where protection was
clearly promised to him. Therefore, when he was frightened and attacked
by the unknown enemy with all his might, although he made use of his
strength, he fought much more strongly with faith, looking at the
promise, and certainly believing that God, according to His word, would
help him in such great danger and preserve him. And in this faith he
overcame God. For although Christ tempted Jacob through this struggle,
he could do nothing apart from the word, or against his word, on which
Jacob relied.

But it can be seen that Jacob did not recognize that it was the Lord
until his hip was touched and the Lord asked him to let him go. For it
is something great that he desires to be blessed by the adversary with
whom he had fought for his life, and the Lord Himself wants to be
recognized, since He attaches to him the name Israel. For he says \[Gen.
32:28\], \"Thou hast fought with God and with men, and hast prevailed.\"
Therefore, just as Jacob\'s life was in danger in the battle, his faith
was also severely challenged. Jacob knew the promise of God, but now he
was being tempted, so that he might begin to doubt whether it was true,
and whether God had indeed promised this, and now that he was in such
great danger, wanted to preserve him. In these terrors and dangers,
faith takes the floor and firmly holds that God, according to His word,
will preserve life even in the midst of death and give him descendants,
and in this way Jacob overcomes and cannot be defeated.

And this is the reason that the prophet speaks here of Bethel. For just
as God, when Jacob fled from his brother, first revealed Himself to him
there, and held out a certain promise to him, by which Jacob sustained
himself in this struggle and overcame it, so afterwards, as it is
written in Genesis 35:7, in this same place the promise is like

Jacob therefore built an altar at the command of the Lord. The meaning
is therefore this: \"At Bethel he found it,\" that is, there the promise
was repeated, and Jacob recognized that he had not believed in vain.

But the naming of this place also has a contrast, by which he attacks
the idolaters, as if he wanted to say: How 1) unlike your fathers are
you! Jacob built an altar in Bethel, but at God\'s command. You built a
temple to the calf there without GOd\'s command. And since God spoke to
us at Bethel and gave us glorious promises, why do we turn to mute
idols? Why do we not pay attention to His word? In this way, the prophet
punishes the idolaters everywhere and attacks them.

Although we do not suffer the physical danger, we must experience this
spiritual struggle. For how often are we challenged because of our sins?
How often do we feel the wrath of God? Often Satan himself threatens us
with eternal torment and damnation from the word of God, not only by
frightening our hearts with threats of the law, but also by holding up
examples of wrath before us. Here, in truth, we wrestle with God like
the Canaanite woman, who heard a distressing statement from Christ, from
whom she had hoped for help. And yet, if we rely on the promises of
Christ, and persistently hope that God will be gracious to us according
to His promises for the sake of His Son, we overcome according to the
example of Jacob, and are also Israel.

But I return to the prophet. Why does he use these histories? Certainly,
in order to show that the kingdom of Israel, which claimed the name of
the patriarch Jacob, was not at all like him. For there was in the
patriarch Jacob an exquisite desire for the word or promise of Christ
and a very constant faith. But the kingdom of Israel, after the example
of Esau, neglected the word and promise of Christ, hating the word and
promise of Christ.

1\) Erlanger: Huoä instead of: Huana.

1326 L. xxiv. 441-143. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi.
is4s-is46. 1327

the brothers who kept the right worship, and relied on his merits, and
stubbornly kept the idolatrous worship, sacrificing to the calves 2c.
But Jacob built an altar to the LORD God of hosts to testify that he
believed the promise made there.

Here again one must be mindful of the mystery of the Trinity. He
mentions \"God\" and the \"angel\", and then adds: \"There he found him
at Bethel, and there he talked with us. Who? Certainly the one who was
God and the angel, XXXX 2c. But so that you may not doubt that he is God
and the angel, he adds: \"The LORD, the LORD of hosts, LORD is his
name.\" Here the exalted name of GOD Jehovah is attached to our Lord
JEsu Christo, which he appropriates to himself, since he says \[John
14:9\], \"Philip, he that seeth me seeth the Father.\" The blind Jews
are not worthy that they should see this light, therefore they know not
what they read when they read this, and it is impossible that they could
find their way out of this passage, or explain it aright. But if it is
true that the prophets spoke from the Holy Spirit, what clearer
testimony to the Trinity can be given? But we want to go further.

**V. 7. Turn therefore to your God, keep mercy and justice, and always
hope in your God.**

The prophet has presented the example of the patriarch Jacob, whose name
the idolatrous Israelites arrogated to themselves, but did not follow
his faith. Now he adds an exhortation and says: \"Do the same, and you
will be rightly called Jacob.

Here, first of all, notice that in this passage the Jews are strongly
reproved by the prophet himself for wrongly interpreting the word
Elohim, which is set above \[v. 4.\], from the angels, for here the same
name is repeated, and the prophet commands that the Israelites should
turn to this angel, and always put their hope in this angel. Therefore,
this angel to whom the prophet commands his people to turn and hope in
him, with whom Jacob fought, is not a created

angels, but the eternal Son of the eternal Father, our Lord Jesus
Christ. This one the prophet commands to recognize and accept, just as
the Father calls down from heaven with his voice \[Matth. 17, 5.\]:
\"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, him you shall
hear.\" And the second Psalm commands \[v. 12.\], \"Kiss the Son.\"

Now see how great the dissimilarity is. While Jacob was still in his
mother\'s womb, he fought with his brother to obtain this promise, and
in the battle against the angel, he won through this very promise. But
the people of Israel do not care about this promise at all. It keeps the
idolatrous services, which are arranged without God\'s command. Through
these it hopes to earn grace and forgiveness of sins. What could be more
incongruous? And what is less fitting to Jacob\'s example? Jacob
wrestled with the angel, and with weeping he asked him to bless him.
Israel turns away from this angel, and throws away the blessing, which
the angel offers here by his word of his own free will, and trusts in
his idolatry. Quite rightly, therefore, the prophet chides the godless
people and admonishes them, saying, \"Turn thou also to thy GOD.\" (For
here the word Elohim is from the one with whom Jacob fought).

But this short sermon contains a very beautiful form of repentance.
First of all, the prophet exhorts them to abandon their trust in their
own merit and to turn to the promised Seed, who will crush the head of
the serpent and lift the curse in which the whole human race has fallen
because of the sin of the first parents. Those who believe in this seed,
who accept this seed, are not idolaters, but worship GOD in the way He
Himself revealed Himself to man and wished to be worshipped. For in this
seed it is made known to us what the will of God is toward us, that He
will not be angry but merciful, that He will not condemn sinners but
make them blessed, since He gave this Son as a sacrifice for sinners.
This is the service of the heart and, as Paul calls it \[Rom. 12, 1.),
the

1328 **XXIV. 443-415.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 12, 7. **W.
VI. I94S-I949.** 1329

reasonable worship, which is held out to us in the first tablet of the
commandments.

But the contrast is obvious. For because he commands them to turn to
God, he indicates that they have turned away from God or from the Word
and are holding on to their preconceptions. Here, those who want to
repent must turn to God, that is, pay attention to the word, according
to the commandment from heaven: \"Him you shall hear.\"

To this service, which is faith in Christ, he exhorts to add other
outward services. But what are these? Are they sacrifices, offerings,
burnt offerings, incense, ablutions 2c.? These were indeed prescribed
for the Jewish people, firstly, that they were exercises in the outward
service of God, secondly, that they were to instruct the people as a
model of the future sacrifice about the right deliverance from sin,
which was not to come through sprinkling with the blood of oxen, lambs
and calves, but with the blood of the promised seed, that is, the Son of
God. Therefore these, since they were an example, had to be taken away
when the fulfillment was present. And since the prophet wants to present
the outward services that those who turn to God perform, he is silent
about these legal services, and presents to us the everlasting and
unchangeable commandments, namely the second table of Moses. These he
summarizes in a very beautiful short summa, as Paul also does when he
says \[Rom. 13, 10.\]: \"So then the love of the law is fulfillment.\"

The first is that they should \"keep mercy\", that is, that they should
be kind to all, just as Christ gloriously praises the works of love,
since he, questioned about the noblest commandment of the law, says
(Marc. 12, 30. f.\]: \"You shall love God your Lord with all your heart,
with all your soul, with all your mind and with all your strength. This
is the first and most noble commandment. And the other is like it, Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.\"

Therefore, if you sincerely desire to turn to God, first take hold of
Christ as your Savior in right faith, believing that God will be
merciful to you because of the death of His Son. After that, if you ask
how

your life, be merciful; not only do wrong to no one, but show kindness
to all to whom you can, for this is the fulfillment of the law.

You will say that this way of right worship is easy. Truly easy, but you
see how few perform it. See how great is the disobedience of the
children and the servants to their parents; how great the negligence of
the parents in the instruction and government of their own. How does
this agree with mercy? Then see how great is the impatience, how great
the raging of anger among men; how many insults, abusive words, terrible
curses, blows, even murder. Add to this the innumerable damages of blind
lusts, then thefts, frauds, misrepresentations, lies, perjury, and who
could enumerate everything? These things are contrary to this
commandment, and yet how common it is in all classes! It is therefore
not surprising that God punishes this deep-rooted licentiousness in all
sins in many ways.

But I do not want to say anything now about the more serious violations
of duty, when either a person in authority performs his office
negligently or also does wrong and practices tyranny, or the teachers do
not teach their own faithfully, 1) and have more their profit in mind
than the salvation of their own. But if those who are converted to God
rightly perform these duties, so that they prove themselves kind to
their neighbor, will we not say with truth of those who do the opposite,
that they have turned away from God and are without faith?

The prophet connects justice with mercy, but in a different way than
Micah did in the sixth chapter \[v. 8\]. For there, for certain reasons,
we have interpreted \"justice\" from the right doctrine by which the
Holy Spirit judges the world, that is, condemns ungodly worship and
ungodly works, and teaches right and holy worship. This part of
repentance the prophet included shortly before, since he commands that
they should turn to God, that is, that they should give ear to the word
of God. Since

1\) Erlanger: äooet instead of: äooent.

1330 L. xxpv. 44S-447. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
I949-ISSS. 1331

Here, \"justice\" actually means the tremendous work of true love,
namely to punish, forbid and condemn what is evil. Thus Paul reminds the
authorities \[Rom. 13, 4.\] that they carry the sword, so that the
wicked should be afraid of them. And fathers of households are also kind
to their own, when they ward off the offenses and severely punish the
servants who sin. For \"justice\" has its place in all classes, so that
each one, according to his profession, may see to it that offenses do
not go unpunished.

In general, this belongs to the \"right\" that Christ commands all
Christians, that they should punish the brother who sins in particular
\[Matth. 18, 15\]. For one should not turn a blind eye to someone\'s
misdeeds. Private people must counter the offenses with admonitions and
punishments, the authorities with the sword, the parents and fathers of
the household not only with threats, but also with beatings. Therefore,
this part of love, which is called \"justice,\" extends no less widely
than \"mercy. And in the whole of life mercy and justice must be applied
side by side, that is, the afflicted must be helped, and those who do
evil must be resisted, so that the afflictions do not get out of hand.

Lyra says very finely: these things are connected for the sake of it,
because right without mercy is cruelty, but mercy without right is
cowardice. For it is true that men are made worse by overindulgence, and
many are deterred from the practice of justice by fear. For we do not
like to incur hatred, which always tends to follow when the right is
exercised.

Therefore the prophet adds a third link and commands us to hope in our
God. Because the world does not want to be punished and condemned, those
who want to exercise justice according to their profession 1) must run
into various dangers. Moreover, the devil is the sworn enemy of the
godly. Therefore, the godly must act in such a way that, if they are
harmed by the devil, they will not be harmed by the devil.

1\) Erlanger: juMeurn instead of: jutUeiuru.

The people who suffer in this way must overcome this with patience and
console themselves with the hope of eternal goods, in comparison with
which all the sufferings of this life are very small.

This is therefore the crown with which the holy church is adorned. She
does not turn her back on God when he speaks, as disobedient children do
to their parents, but humbly listens to him and follows God\'s voice.
Then she is kind to those who are in misery, but she fends off the
wicked, as her profession requires, and if she suffers harm from this,
either from Satan or from the world, she bears it with equanimity, and
brings vengeance on him who judges rightly. But in the meantime she
comforts herself with the hope of the future and eternal salvation,
which will be granted to her by the angel who blessed Jacob. This is the
course in which the godly lay down their lives. For, as I said, the
prophet wanted to summarize in this short sermon the whole life of the
godly and the whole proper form of repentance. Now he returns to
punishing his people who are not satisfied with these holy exhortations.

**V. 8. 9. But the merchant (Canaan) has a false scales in his hand, and
he is glad to defraud. For Ephraim says, \"I am rich and have enough; I
will not be found doing wrong in all my work, which is sin.**

What now follows until the end of the chapter is puffingly connected
with the preceding. He has held up the example of the patriarch Jacob,
whose name the godless people of Israel usurped. After that he also gave
a rule of repentance. Now, however, he shows how much this people has
deviated from the holy patriarch, whose name it claimed for itself, and
from the pure doctrine. Therefore, he no longer calls it the house of
Jacob, but Canaan, to indicate that this people was no better than the
Gentiles, whom the Lord had expelled from the land because of their
manifold sins. And he teaches in order that mercy is neglected, justice
is despised, and the people stubbornly maintain idolatrous worship.

[4332 **L. XXIV, 447-450.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), Cap. 12,
8-12. **W. VI, 1952-1954.** 1333]{.underline}

Furthermore, the word Canaan means a \"merchant. But it is known what
the business of merchants is; they take pains to accumulate money, and
it matters not to them whether they get rich rightly or wrongly.

That is why the prophet adds this about the false scales and the desire
to deceive. For this is what the common people consider to be the best
way to obtain and increase goods, when they falsify weights and
measures, and deceive the buyers who are not provided with them; they do
not think that one can obtain great goods in a legal way. Therefore, the
godless Israelites are convicted that they have no desire for mercy at
all, since they are only concerned about their profit. The same sin is
also punished by Micah in the sixth chapter \[v. 10 ff.\] and shows what
kind of punishments will follow.

But it is peculiar to the covetous that, although they cannot achieve
great riches without doing wrong to others, they do not recognize their
sin, but invent reasons with which they can excuse themselves. Those who
are most honorable say that they are driven to it by the desire to feed
their family. Others guard against the unfavorable times, which entail
greater expenses; still others cover themselves with the example of
others, and think that they too are free to do what, as they see, is
committed by others with impunity.

Therefore, just as Ephraim says in this passage: \"I shall not be found
guilty of any iniquity in all my labor,\" the miser not only excuses
himself, but even flatters himself that the amount of goods obtained
with such evil artifice is a blessing from God. But the outcome proves
that it is not a blessing, for in truth, as Micah says, ill-gotten goods
are like a fire in the rich man\'s house, for certain misfortunes follow
them. Therefore, just as mercy is accompanied by blessing, so also this
senseless striving for the increase of goods is accompanied by manifold
punishments, which, as experience shows, also pass on to the heirs with
their goods.

This is the first part of the Contradiction, in which he teaches that
mercy is not a

is neglected. Now follows the second part, about the neglect of the law.

V.10-12. **But I, the LORD, am your God, from the land of Egypt; and I
who still make you dwell in the tents, as they do in season; and I speak
to the prophets; and it is I who give so much prophecy, and by the
prophets shew me. In Gilead is idolatry, and at Gilgal they sacrifice
oxen in vain; and they have as many altars as there are almonds in the
field.**

He also exhorted to uphold the law, that is, that each one should defend
himself against offenses according to his own stature, and to condemn
what must be condemned. But at this point the Lord complains that this
is neglected even in the most shameful way. I,\" he says, \"brought you
out of Egypt, and the annual feast of tabernacles, which you celebrate,
bears witness to the many benefits with which I have lavished upon you
during the whole time of your journey in the wilderness.

But this is a small thing, I have added a greater benefit through the
prophets to whom I speak, that is, whom I fill with my spirit, teaching
you about the right worship and condemning idolatry. What should you
have done here? Should you not also have obeyed my voice and my
admonitions and exercised justice and condemned what disagrees with my
word?

But of all this you do nothing. In Gilead idolatry is practiced, in
Gilgal sacrifices are made, and the altars are as many as the heaps of
stones in the fields. So with you there is no justice at all.

This punishment, therefore, goes both to the civil authorities and to
the priests, whose duty it was to condemn the ungodly services and to
instruct on the right services. But these were protectors of ungodliness
and idolatry, and by their example they incited the common people to the
ungodly services.

The word XXXX means assimilari, which is commonly interpreted at this
point by: To give parables. For the sermons of the prophets are not
everywhere easily understandable, but resemble riddles, and this is
quite

1334 L. XXIV, 450-4S2. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
1954-1957. 1335

rightly connected with the visions. But it seems to me that this opinion
is more the actual one, which I have given in somewhat modified words,
namely, that God revealed Himself through the ministry of the prophets,
that is, indicated the right service of God through His word. For God
holds forth in the word the likeness of Himself, that is, He paints His
will, about which those who faithfully hold His word cannot be in doubt.
For just as a painting depicts the face of a man, so the word presents
to us the true knowledge of God.

**V. 13. 14. Jacob had to flee to the land of Syria, and Israel had to
serve for a wife, for a wife he had to shepherd. But afterward the Lord
brought Ishmael out of Egypt by a prophet, and caused him to be
shepherded by a prophet.**

This is the third and most important thing, that they do not want to
turn to God, even though they are tempted by him through various
benefits. But here he also uses the example of Jacob, who, although he
was extremely miserable, did not turn away from the right service of God
and the word, while the people of Israel, on the other hand, have an
abundance of goods and still do not want to turn to God. Thus this whole
passage has a puffing connection and holds a useful lesson, if one pays
attention to the contrast in all pieces.

He mentions nothing here about the hope in God, which was the fourth 1)
member. For since there was no mercy, no justice, no conversion to God
among the people of Israel, they were not afflicted with the cross,
which alone awakens the godly hearts to hope in God.

Furthermore, the histories concerning the household of the fathers, such
as the one told here of Jacob, are very useful, for they hold before us
both various instances of adversity and the wonderful guidance of God by
which He protects, sustains and finally blesses His own.

1\) Here is a different counting than above Col. 1330, because here
\"the conversion\" is inserted as a third member.

The patriarch Jaköb had now received the blessing from his father Isaac,
which promised that it would happen that he would not only rule over his
brother, who was the elder, but also that he would have Christ as his
son, through whose good deed the whole human race would be freed from
sin and eternal death.

But what is the beginning of this so rich blessing? Certainly this, that
his brother Esau, whom the divine blessing had made the lesser, began to
pursue the life of Jacob. Therefore the parents, moved by such a great
danger, sent their son Jacob to Mesopotamia, and gave him the order that
he should take only a daughter of his uncle Laban to the wife/ So the
beginning of the blessing is a long banishment, connected with certain
life danger. For nothing else was to be expected from the stubborn anger
and hatred of his brother.

Now Jacob came to his uncle Laban and, according to the counsel of his
parents, was anxious to take a wife, so he serves seven years for
Rachel. But he is deceived by Laban, and Leah is joined to him.
Therefore, he serves another seven years to obtain Rachel. One would
almost consider this ridiculous and unworthy of a man, that he takes
upon himself such a long servitude and suffers it in order to obtain a
wife.

But this act of the patriarch shows first of all how great he had
respected the reputation of his parents, who had given him a certain
commandment not to take any other wife than his uncle\'s daughter.

And it would be desirable that either the children in this matter always
follow the reputation and advice of the parents, or, if they act
contrary, the authorities proceed against them with punishment. For what
could be more unseemly than that one should seek to marry with contempt
for or disregard of one\'s parents? Therefore, even civil laws require
the consent of the parents for a lawful marriage. The testimony of the
Holy Scriptures, however, shows that it is unfortunate advice which
children put into practice against the will of their parents. And
experience also bears witness that such marriages are mostly unhappy.
And

1336 **L. XXIV. 452-454.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 12,
13-15. **W. VI. ISS7-IS5S.** 1337

This is not only because the youthful age is too weak to consult itself
properly, for it is led, even carried away, by blind and foolish
desires, but because God wants the reputation of the parents to be
unharmed everywhere. Therefore, He also blesses the obedient children,
like Jacob, but punishes the disobedient ones as they deserve, whether
they live in or out of marriage.

Secondly, this act of the patriarch shows how highly he respected
marriage. For he would never have submitted himself to such a long
service if he had not firmly believed that this state was pleasing to
God and necessary for mankind. But how does this judgment of the holy
patriarch agree with what the papists teach and do, who condemn an
honorable marriage as an unholy state? But they suffer the due
punishments of this impiety, namely, that they carry around stained
bodies and consciences.

But what a friendly and lovely company may have been in this marriage!
For Jacob had not served so long for the sake of having a companion with
whom he was constantly at odds and quarreling. He saw that God liked
this godly union of bodies and hearts, he saw in this state many
opportunities to practice love and to prove obedience to God. Therefore,
he entered the marriage state with air as a school of all virtues, and
hoped that God would not only govern the married couple, but also adorn
them with many blessings. This also happened, as he himself says \[Gen.
32, 10\]: that he had brought nothing to Mesopotamia except his staff,
but now, having become rich through the blessing of the Lord, he went
out in such a way that he led two armies back to Canaan. But this must
also comfort godly spouses.

Therefore, the summa of this passage is this: Jacob, whose name the
godless kingdom of Israel took upon itself, served in the highest misery
as an exile with his uncle, but because of this he did not depart from
God, did not throw away the word of God and the service of God,
persevered in the hope of blessing. But what do the people of Israel do,
who have been encouraged by many blessings? For the Lord not only
brought them into the land of Canaan, but also gave them prophets in
great numbers to invite them to the right worship. Hear the prophet:

V. 15 **But now Ephraim angers him by their idols; therefore their blood
will come upon them, and the LORD will repay them for their reproach.**

That means, Ephraim does not want to turn to God; it does not hear the
prophets, but keeps the idolatrous worship, therefore it will have an
unhappy end with them. Just as the godly Jacob received the reward of
his godliness, the richest blessing, so the kingdom of Israel will
suffer the punishment of its godlessness and be cut off.

His lord, the king of Assyria, by whose power they thought to be safe
against the attack of other enemies, will repay them for their disgrace,
that is, he will punish the contempt of the word, that they have called
God so long in vain. For this is truly blasphemy, that one does not obey
the word, but persecutes and condemns it.

The Hebrew word XXXXXXX is derived from XXX, which means to be bitter,
as if one said: bitterness. But thus it calls the idols or the image
pillars, which the LORD hates, and by whose service he is embittered. In
Jeremiah Cap. 31, 15. XXXXXXX is taken for the image pillars or memorial
signs of past misfortunes.

1338xxiv . 45I-4S6. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, isss-isW.
1339

**The thirteenth chapter.**

**When Ephraim returned terribly, he was exalted in Israel; then they
sinned through Baal, and were slain for it. But now they make much more
of their sins, and of their silver such images as they can devise, even
idols, which are the vanity of wrought iron. Nor do they preach of the
same: He that will kiss the calves, let him sacrifice men.**

This is also a sermon directed against the sin of idolatry, but the
prophet goes a little further in this passage to show that after God\'s
righteous judgment the people who sin so persistently will be cast out
among the Gentiles without mercy, for the prophet sees a twofold
trouble.

One is that God delays the deserved punishments for such a long time.
Although the Lord does this in order to give sinners time to repent, the
world abuses this patience and long-suffering of God for unrestrained
sinning.

The other annoyance is that when there is no longer any hope of
improvement, God will again inflict the slowness of the punishment with
all the greater severity. For here, again, reason is offended and angry,
for it considers that God lets His wrath shoot its reins to the point of
cruelty. To cut off this annoyance, the prophet mentions, from the
beginning of the kingdom of Israel, the beginnings and the progress of
idolatry and godlessness, in that the prophets opposed it in vain and
called the stubborn people back to the right way.

But this sermon will be very easy for the reader, if he has the history
of the kingdom of Israel before his eyes and knows it. For since the
punishment of idolatry, which Solomon had inflicted on his wives as the
first in this nation, passed not only to his son Rehoboam, but also to
the whole nation, and the ten tribes had united themselves by separation
with the king Jeroboam, but only the tribe of Judah with the rest of the
children of Benjamin acknowledged the grandson of David as their king,
it is right that the kingdom of Israel should be called the kingdom of
Israel.

Jeroboam accepted the calf service in Dan and Bethel. He hoped that this
would make it easier for him to keep the kingdom.

These beginnings of idolatry are what the prophet means when he says
that Ephraim spoke or taught terribly. For though some understand this
of worldly things (politice), and refer it to the seditious speeches of
the ten tribes, yet it seems to me more correct to refer it to the
ungodly doctrines which are in truth, as the prophet calls it, or a
terror to godly hearts. For they see that when ungodly teachings are
spread, at the same time the seed of immense misfortune is scattered, in
which the idolaters must at last inevitably become involved. Therefore,
when the godly see that this will certainly happen, they are moved in
their hearts, and they are sorry that in such grave sin and with such
certain punishments men are so secure.

According to this, the word XXX can also be correctly applied to the
fact that idolatry and ungodly teachings are always connected with
cruelty; as today this is an obvious rage of our adversaries that they
do not even want their idolatry to be punished with the word, and
therefore rage cruelly against the church of God.

There is a familiar figure of speech in the word, for it means to lift
up the head, to rise up. The beginning of idolatry, therefore, was when
the calf service was instituted in Israel by Jeroboam, which Jeroboam
had brought into the kingdom of Israel from Egypt, where he had lived in
exile for a time.

This calf service was followed by another evil, namely the service of
the Sidonian idol Baal, which Jezebel, Ahab\'s wife, introduced, as
history 1 Kings 16:31 shows. But what misfortune followed this idolatry
is indicated by the prophet in one word, but by history in many words.
For it was not only because of this sin that the whole family of Ahab
was cut off, but also because of this sin that the whole family of Ahab
was cut off.

1340 L. XXIV. 4S\"-\^Ü8. interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 13, 1-3. W.
**VI. I963-IS65.** 1341

The whole country was struck with a terrible famine, because neither dew
nor rain came from heaven for more than three years. But the constant
companion of the famine is pestilence, and in addition there was danger
from external enemies.

But even in this way the people were not restored. For since through
Jehu both the service of the idol Baal and the entire offspring of the
king were destroyed, an even more unfortunate time followed. For just as
in former times the royal family had arranged a special worship, so
later each individual formed his own special god, just as with us after
the godless worship of the mass manifold idolatry followed. For almost
everyone called on his special saint and worshipped him, as the
countless number of godless images is a sign. Those who keep them in the
churches today, in such a bright light of the Word, are certainly not
aware of how easy it is to relapse into superstitious worship when there
is such a great occasion for aggravation.

But the prophet uses an extraordinary diminution, because he calls the
idols XXXXX XXXX, the work of the smiths or craftsmen. For if it were
not for the hand of the craftsman, what else would the foolish idolaters
worship, what else would they call upon but wood, stone and silver,
which men use quite properly for other things, but cannot use properly
for worship, since this is due to God alone, who has no equal except the
Word or the Son of God, who alone wants to be worshipped in spirit.

Now who should not be surprised that this has happened in the people of
God against the constant admonitions and punishments of the prophets?

But there is still a far more abominable degree of idolatry left.
Therefore the prophet puts it in the last place, namely that they
sacrificed their sons and daughters to the calves in the opinion that
they wanted to pay a very special service to God with it. For they
judged thus: if God had so highly received the good will of Abraham, how
much

more will the deed itself please him.\' But the idolaters, deceived by
Satan, did not see that Abraham was commanded by a special commandment
to sacrifice his son, but that they were forbidden to kill by the
general commandment. Thus we see that those who once deviate from the
right path fall deeper and deeper into error until they perish.

Here, however, is to be noted the idiom which lies in the word, \"kiss
them. For it signifies the highest worship or reverence due to God, as
is evident from the second Psalm, where he commands \[v. 12\] to kiss
the Son. This highest worship, says the prophet, they thought, was when
they sacrificed men to calves. O, these are truly Satan-blinded minds
and hearts! We should be all the more grateful to our God, who by the
light of his word has freed us from such manifold idolatry and shown us
that he is only truly worshipped when we kiss and hear the Son, and hope
that through his sacrifice God is reconciled with us, sins forgiven and
eternal life given. Now he moves on to the punishments.

**V. 3. These will have the morning wool and the dew that falls early.
Yes, like the chaff woven from the threshing floor, and like the smoke
from the wall of the fire.**

Above in the sixth chapter \[v. 4\] he used the simile of the morning
cloud and the dew, when he comforted the church with the promises of the
kingdom of Christ, therefore in this place, if someone wants to keep the
same opinion, the application is easy, namely that the preachers of
ungodliness and idolatry promised that to those who held to the
customary services everything would go out as desired.

But the prophet adds the opposite opinion: You will not be like the
morning cloud, nor like the dew that falls early, rather you will be
like the chaff on the threshing floor and the smoke from the fire man.
For neither of them can stand, but will be driven out by force.

But it seems more appropriate to me, if also the simile of the dew and
the cloud with

1342 L. XXIV, 4S8-460. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
IS6S-I968. 1343

that of the chaff and the smoke is connected. For the prophet does not
have in mind here, as above, the moistening that refreshes the thirsty
earth, which is almost parched by the heat of the sun, but the sudden
change. For although the cloud that rises early seems to want to occupy
the whole sky, it is gradually and within a short period of time so
consumed by the sun that no trace of it remains anywhere. We see the
same thing with the dew. Although it covers the fields and farmlands far
and wide, it is gradually taken away by the sun. Thus, he threatens,
Israel will also suddenly go down, and indicates that this evil can be
averted by no power or council.

The other parables have the same opinion. Not, as we do, in sheds and
under the roof, but in the open field the Jews threshed the seeds,
therefore the chaff was easily and quickly driven away. In the same way,
he threatens, Israel will be driven away.

The smoke can also nowhere last less than in the wall of fire, because
there it is driven away by the force of the wind, and it can in no way
endure the onslaught of the wind. The same, he says, will happen to
Israel when the Assyrian brings in his army.

In this way the parables puff very beautifully and paint aptly the
magnitude of the calamity that would befall the idolatrous.

**I am the Lord your God from the land of Egypt, and you should know no
other God but Me, and no Savior but Me. I took care of you in the
wilderness, in the dry land. But because they are fed, because they are
satisfied, because they have enough, their heart is lifted up; therefore
they forget me.**

So far he has shown how idolatry gradually increased until it reached
its highest point. To make this godlessness of the people great, he also
speaks of what he has earned for them, and of his good deeds, that he
revealed himself to this people by freeing them from the hard servitude
of Egypt, that he himself had been in the wilderness for their

He had provided for them in many ways, raining manna from heaven and
opening the rocks so that they gave abundant water; 2c. He had finally
led them to very rich pasture, that is, to the land of Canaan, where
they took solid cities and splendidly built houses, sown fields and
vineyards, after the Gentiles had been defeated.

For these great benefits, he says, I receive such thanks that they do
not recognize me as their God and Savior, who alone saved them, but they
ascribe this honor to the idols of the pagans, but they forget mine as
if I had never done them any good. \"Their hearts are lifted up because
they have all things in abundance, that is, they have not heeded the
word that I gave them through the prophets, and have sought other
worship than that which I indicated in my word, and they forget mine,
that is, they have not cared for my word at all, and have lived just as
if I had never spoken to them through the prophets. For this is in
dignity \"forgetting God\", whose name the idolaters always had in their
mouths; but they did not pay attention to the word.

But this is a tremendous and frightening wickedness of the human heart,
that people bear evil more easily than good. Isaiah says \[Cap. 28,
19.\], \"The temptation teaches to mark the word.\" For in evil days we
learn to recognize our sins, mend our ways, call on God, take off our
security, as the example of Manasseh and the parable of the prodigal son
show. But when we have abundance, we almost always forget God. How holy
and humble David behaved when he had to endure danger, first from Saul
and then from his son Absalom, but since he was in good peace and
abundance, he sinned exceedingly shamefully and grievously.

So also Hezekiah. Since the enemy was outside the walls and the utmost
danger was already present, with how great fervor he prayed to God! How
humbly he asked the prophet to add his prayer to it. Likewise, in his
illness and certain danger to his life, he did the same. But since the
enemy was thus eliminated by God\'s help.

1344 L- XXIV, 460-462. interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 13, 4-9. W.
VI, IS68-I97I. 1345

that there was nothing more to fear from him, and his health was also
restored, he fell into security and pernicious ambition, for which he
had to suffer punishment afterwards.

Solomon therefore rightly prays \[Prov. 30:7-9\]: \"Two things I ask of
you, which you will not refuse me before I die: Let idolatry and lies be
far from me (that is, guide me so that I do not fall into ungodly
doctrines and idolatry), do not give me poverty and riches; but let me
take my modest portion of food there. Otherwise, where I would become
too full, I would deny and say: Who is the Lord? or where I would become
too poor, I would steal and take the name of my God in vain. The holy
man saw that nothing is more difficult than not to rise up in good days,
not to be puffed up, not to throw away the fear of God. And also the
pagans, instructed by experience, gave Nemesis or Adrastia as an
undesirable companion to those who did not know how to keep a measure in
well-being.

David therefore rightly praises this as a blessing, that God from time
to time subdues the life and circumstances of His own with tribulations,
and says \[Ps. 119:71\]: \"It is dear to me, O Lord, that You have
humbled me, that I may learn Your law.\" For by this remedy God subdues
the exalting nature, and thereby restrains it, as with spurs and bridle
an unruly horse, that it run not whither its evil lust drives it. But it
is useful that this weakness of ours, or, to put it more correctly, our
extremely depraved nature, be well known to us, so that we may be all
the more diligent in prayer, so that we may not be led into temptation,
and so that, fixing our eyes firmly on the Word, we may nowhere deviate
from the fear of God.

We experience something similar in the household. For the servants are
corrupted by indulgence, but kept in their duty by a right severity.
Even the commonwealths, when they are in bloom, become unrestrained by
good peace, which has always been a fertile mother of vices of every
kind. Hence we see that dominions (imperia) overthrow and fall only when
they are firmest. For what should God do otherwise, after

He says that the people have so shamefully abused his benefits that he
cuts off their opportunity to do evil deeds and keeps the wicked in
check through all kinds of misfortune:

**I will be like a lion against them, and I will lie in wait for them
like a lion on the road. I will meet them like a bear whose cubs are
taken away, and I will tear their hardened heart, and there I will
devour them like a lion; the wild beasts shall tear them.**

These are terrible images with which he describes the greatness of the
punishment that will follow. Known is the ferocity of the lion and its
insurmountable strength. In the case of the Pardern, cunning is added to
the ferocity, for, as the Histories teach, they sit on densely leafy
trees to attack the wanderers who suspect nothing and fear nothing from
another. The bear is also known for his zeal for his cubs and his love
for them.

But why does he particularly mention the tearing of the heart? The
prophet has in mind the stubborn contempt of the word. For when the
prophets, at God\'s command, strove to bring the people back to the
right path, the people did not give room to the godly exhortations. But
now it will happen, he says, that your hearts, which were closed against
the word until now, will be opened by hard misfortune, and that you will
recognize that you suffer the deserved punishments for idolatry, and
look around in vain for help, since you will become a prey to the
Assyrian like a hungry lion.

**V. 9. Israel, you bring disaster upon yourself, for your salvation is
with me alone.**

This is very well connected with the preceding. For since, as I also
said above \[v. 1\], reason is angry and thinks that this people will be
beaten more severely than it is compatible with the goodness of God,
this is set as an excuse, as it were. For thus says the Lord, \"Your
salvation is with me alone.\" That is, I desire to protect you, to
preserve you, to guide you, so that you will not suffer any adversity.
For

1346 L. XXIV, 462-4S4. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI.
IS7I-I973. 1347

that is, to be God in truth. But you hinder me, who earnestly strive to
accomplish this, by your sins. For since you do not put an end to your
ungodly worship and idolatry, what else can I do but let you perish? But
this misfortune comes from you. This is the right understanding of this
passage.

But we have used this saying to refute the advocates of free will, that
the cause of our salvation is God alone, not our works, but that if we
are without grace we can of ourselves do nothing but sin, and so we
ourselves are the cause of our downfall. Although this view does not
seem to agree entirely with the one we have given, it is not different
in any other respect than that it is transferred from the individual
(specie) to the general (genus). For just as Israel, through its sins,
was for itself the cause of its ruin, but God, if it had ceased to sin
and repented, would gladly have preserved and protected it, so all men,
through sin, prepare for themselves certain ruin if they do not repent,
and, if they do not have the Holy Spirit, they can neither resist sin
nor ward off and heal the penalty of sin. For this rule is certain and
true, that God is good by nature, therefore nothing else can proceed
from God but what is good. Death, however, is evil, sin is also evil, as
are the punishments that follow sin, whether they be physical or
spiritual; therefore, these evils do not come from God.

Where do they come from? you will say. They come from sin, according to
the saying \[Gen. 2:17\], \"In the day that ye eat of this tree ye shall
surely die.\" But if you ask further, what is the cause of sin, the holy
Scriptures show that it comes from the devil, to whom our parents agreed
against the word of God, and since they disobeyed God, they fell into
terrible punishments. For through that sin, not only are our bodies so
weakened that they are made of immortal

1\) Erlanger: ut instead of: tu.

mortal, but also the soul is corrupt. For man has lost the right
knowledge of God, and also the will is so corrupted that it can desire
nothing but evil, that is, as Paul says \[Rom. 8:7\], that it hates the
law of God and has a desire to sin. For here we are not dealing with
natural desires, such as the desire to maintain oneself and one\'s own,
in hunger the desire for food, in excessive fatigue the desire for rest
2c. For God wanted this to happen also in the intact nature, although
now, for the sake of sin, there is some infirmity involved, for these
desires do not always keep themselves in their bounds, as we learn from
experience.

This is therefore the true cause of evil or sin, that the will is
corrupted by sin, and the soul lacks the knowledge of God and the spirit
of God. For from this flow not only sins of all kinds as from a constant
source, but also the other evils that we suffer in this miserable life,
and the damned will suffer eternally. The devil, however, inflames the
will against God, and like a horse, which by its nature is unruly, gives
it the spurs. Those who defend free will do not see these so many and
manifold evils from sin, which are caused by the devil.

For although reason can control itself so that it does not consent to
all lusts as far as the outward work is concerned (for it often resists
the evil inclinations, often moderates them; for if this were not to
some extent in us, what use could the worldly laws, what use the
discipline, which, as we see, is so much praised by God, have? And
experience teaches that it is almost the only thing that works, so that
we do not all fall equally into murder, adultery and other vices), yet
it cannot be deduced from this that there is free will, that is, that
man can govern himself, do right and make himself pleasing to God
without the Holy Spirit, which is the main thing for which the defenders
of free will fight. For covetousness is sin in itself, and it is not
idle but sinful.

1348 **L, XXIV, 464-467.** Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 13, 9-13.
W. **VI, 4973-1976.** 1349

but constantly agitates the hearts against the law of God. In truth,
therefore, there is nothing good in man unless the hearts are first
cleansed by the Holy Spirit through faith, and the iniquity born with us
is removed through the forgiveness of sins.

And this is our reason for saying that there is no free will, and for
defending that there is nothing good in man, and nothing good can be
done by a man unless the Holy Spirit restores him, as the church indeed
sings quite gloriously in the spirit: Sine tuo nomine nihil est in
homine, nihil est innoxium sohne your divine power is nothing in man,
nothing is uncorrupted For although God demands and approves of the
outward discipline that lies to some extent in the will of man, through
it we are not freed from sins, not freed from death, not pleasing to God
that he forgives our sins and gives us eternal life. This is obtained
only through faith, through the merit of the Son of God, who was
sufficient for our sins by his death, and who received the promise of
the Spirit from the Father, by whom hearts are moved to believe the
forgiveness of sins, and to resist sin and the harmful evil desire,
which does not die completely until this flesh dies. Therefore, our
people have not used this saying of the prophet inappropriately against
the protectors of free will.

**V. 10. 11. Where is your king gone, who shall help you in all your
cities? and your judges, of whom you said: Give me kings and princes?
Well, I gave thee a king in mine anger, and will take him away from thee
in my wrath.**

Authority is a very high gift of God, given to people for protection
against the multiple wrongs of evil people. And God gives prosperity to
the authorities who diligently strive to curb what the wicked desire.
But listen to what the prophet, yes, the Lord himself, threatens here.
Not only do sins turn the merciful God into an angry God, but they also
take away the power and weapons of the authorities from the

Hand, that it cannot do what it is commanded to do by God. As if to say:
I have given you a king, I have given you princes, who should protect
you against all injustice, both from external enemies and from your
fellow citizens, but as I cannot save you, because you bring about your
deserved reward through your sins, so also your authorities cannot save
you, but they will perish at the same time as you.

What now follows: \"I gave you a king in my wrath\" is mostly
interpreted of Saul, whom the Lord gave a king to the godless people,
who wanted to have a king after the example of the Gentiles, while
before not hereditary kings but judges ruled, whom the Lord chose
according to his will sometimes from this, sometimes from that family.

But this does not seem to be inappropriately applied to Jeroboam. For
this sermon does not address the whole nation to whom Saul was given as
king, but the house of Israel. And Judah kept its kings until the
Babylonian captivity. Jeroboam, therefore, is the king that GOD gave in
His wrath. For by the division or rebellion the LORD punished the
idolatry which Solomon had introduced among the people, as history
shows. Therefore he threatens that, just as this division of the kingdom
of Judah happened because of idolatry, so also the kingdom of Israel
should be completely destroyed by the Assyrian because of idolatry, so
that it would have no king from then on. Thus the beginning of this
kingdom coincides with its end.

V. 12. 13. **The iniquity of Ephraim is bound together, and their sin is
kept. For it shall be woe unto them as unto a woman in childbirth: for
they are careless children. The time will come that they will not stay
from the wailing of the children.**

It is not now that you have begun to sin, idolatry 2c. began when you
began to have the kingdom. But I did not punish you immediately, I
gathered your sins into a bundle, as it were, and gave you room to
repent, restraining my wrath as if your sins were hidden and I did not
see them. But now they are to be visited on

[1350 L. XXIV, 467-469. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1976-1978. 1351]{.underline}

The day will come, and the long-deserved punishments will come upon
them. Then the pains of a woman in childbirth will seize you, that is,
you will be sorely afflicted. \"For they are careless children\", that
is, because you did not want to be satisfied with my word, which alone
makes wise people, since it instills the fear of God in the hearts and
takes away security. For this is the right wisdom.

Therefore, the time will come when you will be very severely distressed
and will not be able to escape your pain in any way, like a woman in
childbirth who, when the fruit is to come from her, will be most
severely distressed and will not be able to escape the pain in any way,
no matter how much work and effort she may put in. This is the right
opinion.

The words in Hebrew are somewhat obscure. Because they read like this:
XXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX,,

quoniam tempus, non stabit,^1^ ) in utero filii \[for time will not
stand still, the children are in birth\]. The word means the mother or,
to say it actually, the cervix. But it is derived full of the verbum
which means to break and to shatter. For when the fruit comes to the
cervix, the bones that are close to each other, which are called ossa
sacra, come apart through this collision, 2) that I say, and it is a
very strong pain, and if the woman in childbirth does not do it with all
her strength, she is in danger along with the fruit. Therefore, this
image indicates nothing other than the most imminent danger. Thus king
Hezekiah says to Isaiah \[Cap. 37, 3.\]: \"The children are come to all
birth (ad Mischbar), and there is no strength to give birth.\" That is,
I am in the utmost anguish, I am harassed and frightened on all sides,
and there is no way of salvation open. Quite the same image, indeed the
same words are used here by the prophet. Although we have used many
words, we have not been able to express sufficiently what is briefly
stated in the Hebrew speech.

1\) This comma is placed by us. In Hebrew, the tiphcha is a
tlistinetivus.

2\) We followed the reading of the Jena: \"ollisions instead of:
oollusions in the Wittenberg and in the Erlangen.

**V. 14. But I will deliver them from hell and save them from death.
Death, I will be a poison to you; hell, I will be a pestilence to you.**

After the prophet has threatened the idolaters with destruction, he now
returns to comforting the godly, who should not only see the so terrible
punishments, but also suffer them, as it is wont to happen. For when
common punishments are meted out, the godly also receive their share of
them.

But this is a wonderful comfort that he holds out to them. For he does
not say that when the Assyrian ruler comes, the Lord will deliver them
from his hand. He says: You too will be killed, or led away captive
among the Gentiles, and your situation will be no better than that of
the idolaters, for whose sake such great wrath and misfortune will be
inflicted. This punishment you will bear with equanimity, and you will
hope for a far better salvation than if you were now delivered from the
hand of the enemies. For I will save you from the power of hell, that
is, if you have already died and been buried, I will raise you to a
better and eternal life. Thus will I recompense your sufferings and
afflictions, which shall create an everlasting and exceeding glory 2c.
\[2 Cor. 4:17.\]

The word that is generally translated by hell means a grave or the place
where the corpses of men are laid. Therefore the prophet wants to say:
when your bodies will be buried in the earth and you will lie there
without any feeling, only then the salvation will be given to you, which
I ask you to hope for and which I promise you.

But how will this happen? The Lord answers: \"Death, I will be a poison
to you; hell, I will be a pestilence to you. Here, first of all,
consider the contrast. Death is to us a pestilence and a ruin. For who
among men has ever escaped death? But now the Lord comforts us that it
will happen that death, which is an incurable pestilence to all men,
will also feel its pestilence and be destroyed, and promises that it
will be a poison to death and a pestilence to hell.

1352 L. XXIV, 46S-47I. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 13, 14. W. VI,
IS78-I98I. 1353

Therefore it must first be noted that the Lord is speaking here, who
just before \[v. 4\] said: \"I am the Lord your God, and you should know
no other God but Me, and no Savior but Me.\" For to overcome or to
destroy death is not the power of man, but of God alone. But how God
became a poison to death, the New Testament explains, that God\'s Son,
born of the eternal Father, the Eternal and Almighty, conceived by the
Holy Spirit in the body of the Virgin Mary, was born as a man into this
world. After having taught men there about the good will of God and
having proved Himself to be the Son of God with powerful signs and
wonders, He finally became obedient to the Father until death, yes,
death on the Cross, which He suffered to pay for our sins and to appease
the wrath of God. And after he died on the cross, he was buried, but on
the third day he rose again, for he who was life could not be kept from
death and the grave.

Only then is fulfilled what the Lord promises in this passage. For death
devoured Christ like other men, but in a wonderful way it happens: while
death devours Christ, he is devoured; while he kills him, he is killed;
while he overcomes, he is overcome. For he contends not merely with a
man, but with the man who is the eternal Son of God and the Lord over
all creatures. Therefore, it was finally revealed that he had the power
to leave and take back his soul or life, and that he was not merely a
man, although he truly took on human flesh, but also the immortal God.
The church praises this miracle in a very beautiful hymn: Mors et vita
duello conflixere mirando, dux vitae mortuus regnat vivus \[death and
life have fought with each other in a wonderful duel; the prince of life
lives and reigns\]. 1)

> 1\) The old translation offers here this verse: Es war ein
> wunderlicher Krieg, Da Tod und Leben rungen.
>
> The life that kept the victory, It swallowed up death. The Scripture
> has proclaimed that. How one death devoured another; A mockery of
> death has become.

As far as grammar is concerned, the reader should know that the same
words are used here as in Ps. 91:5, 6: \"Lest thou be afraid of the
pestilence that creepeth in darkness, of the pestilence that wasteth at
noonday.\" Both in that passage, as here, denote a pernicious evil or
exceedingly harmful pestilence that infects and kills the body. The
Latin translation has: Asperum verbum et daemonium meridianum, but,
compared with this passage, it is easily understood. In Hebrew it says
and

Although St. Paul changed the words in 1 Cor. 15, 55, he still expressed
the meaning in the most beautiful way. He says, \"Death is swallowed up
in victory,\" that is, Christ has overcome death and wants us to enjoy
this victory also, for since he assists us, we will not be overcome by
death, but will overcome. Therefore he adds \[v. 55.\], \"Death, where
is thy sting? Hell, where is thy victory?\" As if to say, \"Both our
enemies have ruled far and wide and oppressed all men, but after death
is swallowed up or destroyed by Christ, he can no longer harm. For
though he is our enemy, yet he is deprived, conquered, and stripped of
all his weapons and power. Therefore, we who believe in Christ, the
victor over death, fear him without cause.

And this is the right and useful use of this passage, that as often as
we remember death, we fix our eyes on Christ, and look upon this his
victory. For if you look at death as it is against us, you will rightly
despair. For you will not find in yourself any strength with which you
could withstand so powerful an enemy. He never fought with anyone whom
he had not overcome, Christ alone excepted. Therefore, if you do not
want to be overcome, unite yourself with Christ, that is, rely on his
victory, hope that you will be preserved by him, and although death will
kill the body, nevertheless hold fast to it and believe that Christ will
restore you to a better and eternal life. For he is the Lord over death,
he has conquered it, he has killed it, and, as the prophet says here

[1354 L. XXIV, 471-473. interpretations on the prophets. W.
VI.IS8I-IS83. 1355]{.underline}

your death has become a pestilence and poison, so that we who are under
your death may live through it, as through it death had to die. But who
is so senseless that he should be afraid of a dead enemy?

This comfort must be firmly kept in death and in all other dangers and
difficulties of this life, then it will happen that we, supported by
this rich hope, will not succumb.

The teachers of the pope show various protections against death, but not
at all lasting ones. For not our works can save us from death, not the
merits of others, not the intercessions of the saints. This is the only
way in which we are preserved, that we firmly believe that Christ has
overcome our death by his death and will raise us up to a better and
eternal life.

Paul, according to his excellent insight, derives very beautiful and
extremely comforting conclusions from this passage of the prophet. He
says: \"If death has lost its sting or its power, it follows that sin
has also been atoned for through Christ, and we are freed from it. For
where sin is, there must necessarily be death, just as where sin is not,
there must be life and righteousness. But when sin is taken away through
this victory, the power of sin, that is, the law, is also taken away at
the same time, so that it cannot condemn or accuse us. This, he says, is
the glorious victory we have through Christ, for which we rightly give
thanks to our Lord, who gave it to us so that we might enjoy it.

**V. 14. 15. But the consolation is hidden from my eyes. For it will
bear fruit between brothers.**

I understand this in the simplest way, that this comfort is not seen
with the eyes, but accepted in faith. The eyes do not see it, but the
ears hear it in the word, and the heart firmly believes by faith that
what it hears is true, and in this way is satisfied with the word. But
if someone prefers it

to the unbelieving synagogue, that they reject the gospel and will not
believe, I will not argue with him.

What he adds about the brethren actually serves to depict the church.
For those who believe in Christ, that is, those who hope for salvation
from death and hell through Christ, are \"children of God,\" John 1:12.
Therefore they are called brothers, since they have the same Father
through Christ. Among these brethren, he says, he will bring forth
fruit, that is, through this consolation, which is hidden from sight,
Christ will awaken the hearts so that they will await eternal life with
the utmost certainty, and bear and endure with equanimity whatever
hardships this present life may bring. But those who are not brothers,
that is, who do not believe that they have become children of God
through Christ, will remain in death and in hell, as there are the Jews,
Turks, pagans, hypocrites, the false brothers, who do not acknowledge
Christ as the Son of God and as the Savior of the world.

**An east wind will come; the LORD will come out of the wilderness, and
dry up its well, and dry up its fountain; and he will take away the
treasure of all precious things.**

This piece is also interpreted differently. Denu some refer it to the
Assyrian, others to Nebucadnezzar, perhaps because here it is said about
delicious equipment. Jerome invents, I do not know what kind of
spiritual interpretation, because he interprets the treasure and the
precious things of the holy fathers, who were delivered from hell by the
resurrected Christ. Although this is not ungodly talk, it does not
belong here at all. Therefore, one must pay attention to what is most
appropriate in the explanation of the prophets.

First, therefore, the reader may note that the \"east wind\", which he
calls XXX XXXX, is always taken in the evil sense. For as the west winds
are fruitful, so the east winds harm the fields, because they are cold
and dry. Furthermore, these are not words of grace, but of wrath: \"He
will dry up their well and dry up their spring\" 2c.

1356 **L. XXIV, 47S-47S.** Interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 13, 15.
14, 1st W. **VI, 1S83-I988.** 1357

But this is much too harsh for us to refer to either the Assyrian or the
Babylonian captivity, for these punishments did not dry up the spring or
well. The people were indeed severely afflicted, but not completely
destroyed, and even though the kingdom of Israel perished, the fountain
remained, that is, the largest and best part of the people, from which
Christ was finally born.

Therefore, this prophecy refers to the synagogue, which did not want to
acknowledge Christ, the victor over death and hell, but rather crucified
and killed him as a child of the devil. For as he said above that he
would bring forth fruit between brothers, that is, preserve and save
those who believe that they are in grace and children of God for his
sake, so he says here of the unbelieving part that it will happen,
because they do not want to accept this Savior, that they will
completely perish and lose everything that they have had so far in the
sight of all the peoples of the whole world.

Therefore, the treasure and the precious vessels are not silver or gold
vessels, but the exalted name that they have been called the people of
God, that to them alone the

trusted in what God had spoken, that they were born of the holy tribe of
the fathers, that they had the church and the service instituted by God.
They are deprived of these so great gifts in such a way that they go
astray in the thickest darkness, and as the Psalm threatens \[Ps. 69,
23.\]: \"Let their table,\" that is, the speeches of Moses and the
prophets, which open the way to life and alone can comfort the afflicted
hearts, \"become a snare to them.\" For the godless Jews nourish their
hatred against God, their blindness and their damnation when they read
the holy Scriptures, and fall deeper and deeper into darkness. This is
in truth drying up the well and drying up the spring.

And this is done by the Lord, who comes up out of the wilderness like a
wind that destroys the joyful seeds. For this punishment began with the
Romans, whom God had raised up, as Christ says Luc. 19:44: \"But this
shall come upon thee, because thou knewest not the time wherein thou
wast visited.\" This is the right and proper opinion of this passage,
and is most appropriately connected with the foregoing. Now follows
another, new sermon, therefore we will begin a new chapter there.

**The fourteenth chapter.**

**V. 1. Samaria shall be desolate, for they have disobeyed their God.
They shall fall by the sword, and their young children shall be crushed,
and their pregnant women shall be torn in pieces.**

Rightly we start here the last chapter, because the prophet wanted to
summarize here the epitome of all his sermons.

First of all, he threatens the kingdom of Israel with desolation because
of its idolatry, for he expressly speaks of Samaria. Then he exhorts the
people to turn to God in this misfortune, and he beautifully teaches
what the right repentance is, namely the improvement of life and trust
in mercy, through which forgiveness of sins comes.

will be caught. To this exhortation he adds the sweetest and richest
promises. Then he returns to the exhortation and closes his sermons in
this way.

The threat is short, but very severe. He says: \"Samaria will become
desolate\", that is, the whole kingdom of Israel will be destroyed by
the Assyrian. And he adds the cause of this so terrible punishment:
\"For they have disobeyed their GOD.\" This offense Israel no doubt
recognized just as little as our Papists today recognize that they were
idolaters and blasphemers. For they were precious and difficult
worshippers in the kingdom of Israel, of which they also proudly
declared that they were worshipping the God who was

1358 L. XXIV. 475-477. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
1S88-1SSI. 1359

saved them from Egypt. Therefore, as the papists, when accused of
ungodliness, refer to the heavy burden of vows, the fasts, the vigils,
the great expenses spent on the magnificent churches, the quantity of
masses, the austere life, and similar things: Israel undoubtedly
defended itself against this accusation, and did not want to be
considered rebellious, but exceedingly obedient to God, and referred to
the so many places that were adorned with churches, and were also
formerly kept holy by the fathers.

But the prophet calls them rebellious against God because they had not
obeyed the word of God. There was no lack of worship in the kingdom of
Israel, but it was sinful and abominable to God because it was contrary
to His word. Jacob had sacrificed in Bethel, Isaac and Abraham also in
other places, but their descendants were commanded by God\'s voice that
they should sacrifice only in the Temple at Jerusalem. Since the kingdom
of Israel did not respect this commandment at all and built churches
everywhere as it pleased, was it not in fact disobedient to God?

Even we, when we accuse the papists today, do not deny that they have
orders, vows, fasts, masses, prayers, etc., but we condemn the fact that
these things are nothing but human ordinances, instituted without the
Word, or even contrary to the Word of God. For not those things are
divine services which we institute, but those things which God commands
by His Word. Those who either set aside this word or act contrary to it
are disobedient, and not only do not perform God\'s service, but also
anger God and provoke Him to severe punishments.

But there are four kinds of right worship, which differ from each other
in their worthiness and order. The first and highest worship is faith in
Christ, according to the voice that sounded from heaven \[Matt. 17:5\],
\"Him shall ye hear.\" This confidence includes the fear of God, air to
speak, calling and other things, which the first table indicates, and
which Paul calls the \"reasonable worship,\" because it is without
hypocrisy and comes from a heart of God.

The Holy Spirit has illuminated the flow of the Spirit. -

The second place is occupied by obedience to the second tablet, or the
works of love.

In the third place are the ceremonies that God wanted to have in the
church, so that they would not only be exercises, but also testimonies
of the divine will. Thus, it was not enough for a Jew to keep the Ten
Commandments, he also had to be circumcised, and we today, if we want to
be members of the Church, must not set aside or reject Holy Baptism and
the Lord\'s Supper. Now as far as these three kinds are concerned, all
Christians are equal in this, for all find themselves equally obliged to
perform these services.

The fourth place is occupied by the works of the profession; these also
find GOtte pleasant services, although they are different. The
authorities serve God when they use their power to maintain justice and
equity. A householder, if he works diligently; a housemother, if she
takes care of the children and the servants 2c. Those, therefore, who do
not want to disobey GOD, but give him the obedience that is due and
pleasing, should remain in their career, and be careful not to seek
other services after the manner of hypocrites, for in vain is GOD served
by such things, which are nothing but the commandments of men \[Matt.
15:9\].

What the prophet threatens about the \"young children\" and the pregnant
women is frightening, and one tends to ask for the reason, 1) why the
innocent infancy is subjected to such great punishments. But the answer
is easy. If these children are in the church, that is, circumcised in
the Old Testament, but baptized with us, they suffer no evil; for the
flesh is indeed afflicted, but the spirit is saved. But this affliction
of the flesh also has its fruit, for this sad sight of wrath serves to
instruct others in the fear of God, so that they do not surely sin, but
amend their lives in time and ask for forgiveness of sins, whose
punishments they also see the innocent infant suffer. This reason, too,
is true: because the children are a part of the

1\) Erlanger: instead of: Huaeri.

1360 **2 XXIV, 477-480.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 14, 1-3.
**w. VI, ISSI-IW3.** 1361

Church, they must suffer tribulations with the Church so that they may
be conformed to the Son of God.

V. 2. **Turn, O Israel, to the LORD your God, for you have fallen
because of your iniquity.**

Here begins the exhortation to repentance, and it contains an
exceedingly useful lesson about what we should do when we feel the
punishments and wrath of God. What the vermin or flesh tends to do is
well known; for it flees from God and shrinks from Him as from an enemy.
For even when it feels that the punishment comes from Him, it cannot
hope for help, but often turns to unauthorized help, as can be seen in
Saul, when he realized that he had been rejected by God \[1 Sam. 28:7\].

But the prophet teaches his people differently. It is true, he says,
that you have fallen because of your iniquity, but do not despair
because of it. For he who has smitten you will also lay his healing hand
upon you. Therefore, do not turn to human help, but turn to the Lord
your God. For even though he has smitten you, provoked you by your sins
and forced you, he has not ceased to be God for that reason. Therefore,
turn to him, but do not, as you did before, turn your back on him when
he teaches, admonishes and counsels you through his word. Turn your face
to him, hang on his mouth, listen to what he commands and obey, and he
will cease to be angry and will not only mitigate the punishments, but
also forgive the sins and shower you with eternal goods.

Thus the prophet first indicates in general what repentance is, namely
that one turns to the Lord or pays attention to the word. But now he
will explain it in detail.

**Take these words with you and turn to the Lord, saying to him,
\"Forgive us all our sins and do us good, so that we may offer up the
farrows of our lips**.

I understand this in the simplest way: \"Take these words with you\"
means as much as if he said: Obey this admonition of mine. Some think
that he was responding to the speech

This is what is alluded to in the first verse of Moses, who calls the
law common, so that the opinion would be Keep the law, pay attention to
the word, and learn to pray or talk to God in this way, and be careful
that you do not do anything against the word. For this is a part of
repentance, that one obeys the word and makes up for what one has done
contrary to it. But I like the former view better, and the repetition
fits very well: \"Take these words with you,\" that is, hear me, \"and
turn to the Lord.

But he adds how they should repent: \"Say unto him, Forgive us all our
sins, and do us good.\" What doctrine of repentance is in the Pabst\'s
church is well known. They preach of a complete repentance (contritione)
and a half repentance (attritione), 1) which every one can invent for
himself. For they do not hold that this is a movement of the Holy
Spirit, which He awakens in believers through the word of the law. After
this, they want the auricular confession to follow, in which the
offenses for which forgiveness is desired are confessed. Finally, a
penance is imposed, which contains the burden of certain works. In these
things they have perfect repentance, for they believe that if absolution
is added afterwards, which is based not only on the merits of Christ,
but also on those of the saints, they would have forgiveness of sins.

But it is not necessary to refute this in detail; we will only compare
the present text of the prophet with this teaching, and it will become
obvious that Pabst\'s teaching of this article is completely
contradictory to the writings of the prophets.

First of all, notice who the people are to whom Hosea preaches, namely
the shameful idolaters, who afterwards (as it must happen once one has
strayed from the right path) stained themselves with various sins and
shameful deeds. And the most ample evidence of these sins are the
terrible punishments with which the people of Israel were punished.

1\) Cf. Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1471, thesis 34.

2\) Erlanger: aurwularurn instead of: aurieularkM.

1362 L. XXIV, 480-482. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, I993-ISW.
1Z63

is beaten. The prophet has such disciples. But now he has to deal with
those who are oppressed with the wrath of God and under the terrible
punishments of sins, and show them the way to reconcile God and obtain
forgiveness of sins.

But who should be so foolish and senseless that he should not think that
in the same case he must follow the prophet as a teacher rather than the
popes and the schools? But the prophet does not command that one should
go to the priest and then secretly whisper sins in his ear. He commands
that one should turn to the Lord, open his mouth and ask for forgiveness
of sins. This prayer contains first of all the confession of sin, not
one that is made with the mouth against a man, but one that is made
against the Lord without hypocrisy and from a true heart. This
confession should have been held up to the church and praised as
necessary for the forgiveness of sins, even though it does not deserve
the forgiveness of sins, as the papists falsely boast of their
hypocritical confession.

Thus David confesses of himself \[Ps. 32:5\], \"Therefore I confess my
sin unto thee, and hide not my iniquity. I said: I will confess my
transgression unto the LORD. Then forgiveest thou me the iniquity of my
sin.\" So also Daniel, Jeremiah and other prophets add a confession of
sins to their prayers. Furthermore, this confession is not only the
confession of certain offenses or vices, but it comprehends the whole
affliction of nature, that even though we are not stained with outward
iniquities, as some are, yet there is nothing good in us, as David
confesses, Ps. 51:6: \"Against thee only have I sinned,\" or that I
render the opinion more clearly: before thee I am nothing but a sinner,
and do evil before thee. This confession is the right humiliation and
gloriously praises God\'s grace and mercy that He does not reject people
who are so stained, corrupted and lost by sin, but has mercy on them and
forgives them.

Therefore, we should remember that repentance begins with the
recognition and right confession of sin. But this can

cannot take place without very great pain. For since the heart sees the
will of God, and the eternal punishments of sin, that is, death, before
its eyes, it is seriously moved, and not only bears sorrow for the sins
committed, but also begins to hate sin in truth. Now, whether you call
this movement a complete repentance (contritionem) or a half repentance
(attritionem), we will not hold with the Sophists that it is a movement
of man, but it is a work of the Holy Spirit. For the nature that is
without the Holy Spirit does not hate sin, but loves it; does not bear
sorrow for sin, but delights in sins and in the occasions of sins, and
cannot be satisfied with them.

Therefore, as the Holy Spirit rebuilds man through repentance, he stirs
up various movements in the hearts so that they see the shamefulness of
sin, that they think of the punishments and the wrath of God. These
thoughts are followed by hatred of sin and a fervent desire for
forgiveness. However, although sometimes the feeling of punishments
moves the hearts to grieve over the sins committed, the proper
instrument of the Holy Spirit, I say, is the word of God, by which God
indicates that He is angry with sin and that He will subject sinners to
both temporal and eternal punishments. When the Holy Spirit sends this
consuming fire of divine judgment into the hearts through the Word, what
follows are not hypocritical but right and serious movements, sorrow for
sin, confession of sin, and the resolution to continue to guard against
sin and to flee from it.

But even here one must flee the nonsensical and godless opinions of the
sophists. For they hold that this repentance and suffering merits the
forgiveness of sins. We say that it is necessary if one desires
forgiveness of sins, but we exclude all merit, for this, as will become
clear later, is not ours but Christ\'s.

Therefore, repentance is begun when we recognize our sins and sincerely
grieve over them. But then it is completed when, in addition to this
repentance and sorrow, trust in mercy is added, and

\^364 D- XXIV, 482-484. mslegung des Hosea (3.), cap. 14, 3. W. VI,
4996-1999. 1365

the hearts, as the prophet teaches here, turn to God and demand
forgiveness of sins. The Pabst\'s schools do not teach anything about
this faith, which is the main part of repentance and which alone
receives the forgiveness of sins.

This faith or confidence is also the work of the Holy Spirit, not our
work. For nature flees from God when it sees Him inflicting punishment,
and cannot expect salvation from where it sees wrath coming from. This
attitude of our nature is not only corrected by the Holy Spirit through
the word of the Gospel, but it is completely abolished and confidence in
mercy is instilled in our hearts. For God indicates in it that, although
he hates sin, he is not so minded as to want to condemn sinners for that
reason. For he gave his Son to the world and commanded that through him
one should believe in forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

When the hearts are moved by the Holy Spirit through the Word and see
this will of the heavenly Father, they gain hope in their pain and see,
as it were, the light of life in the shadow of death. For even though
sins terrify them, they do not despair because they see the incomparable
ransom for sins, the blood of the Son of God. Even though they resent
the fact that they have earned death with their sins, they find rest in
the mercy of God, who does not want the death of the sinner, but wants
him to repent and live, and therefore did not spare His only begotten
Son, but gave Him up to death on the Cross, so that we might be healed
by His wounds. In this way repentance becomes complete, from which
certain fruits come forth, as we will recall below.

This confidence is clearly indicated by this speech of the prophet. For
whoever opens his mouth against God and says, \"Pick up,\" or \"Take
away,\" or \"Forgive all sin,\" you cannot believe that he doubts the
merciful will of God. This is what we call faith or confidence in mercy,
which relies on the sacrifice of the Son of God, and only the
forgiveness of sins.

The Lord is the one who receives the forgiveness of sins, or, as Peter
says, purifies the heart, for unclean hearts are those that have not yet
been purified from sins. But when sin is forgiven, it follows that
righteousness is by grace and in vain, and does not happen to us by our
works and for their sake, as the papists also lie ungodly.

And the prophet uses here an extraordinarily emphatic word XXX XXX-XX,
because it means to be relieved of sin, as bearers of burdens are
relieved of their burden. And there is no doubt that the Baptist used
this very word, since he calls John 1:29\]. Christ is called the Lamb
who bears the sins of the world. The Latin translator has generally
rendered it by remittere, as in the 32nd Psalm, v. 1, \"Blessed is he
whose transgressions are forgiven\"/that is, whose transgressions have
been taken away or cancelled. How this happens is indicated by the
Baptist, who teaches that Christ is the sacrificial lamb who bears our
sin and takes it upon Himself. If hearts truly hold this and believe
that God is thereby reconciled, this is true faith, the work or gift of
the Holy Spirit, which is given through the preaching of the Gospel.

Here it might come to the mind of a reader who is ignorant of holy
things, how a mind could hope for forgiveness of sins from God, since
God punishes sins severely, as the example of the kingdom of Israel
shows. But let him remember that the true punishment of sin is not this
bodily misfortune, but eternal death. Therefore, although the bodily
punishment is upon us, the hope of the forgiveness of the eternal
punishment must be firmly preserved and asked for. By sending His Son,
God shows that, although He will punish sinners with certain
punishments, He will gladly remit the eternal punishments to those who
take hold of the Son in faith and rely on His merit. Therefore, the
godly comfort themselves with this hope that the right and eternal
punishment of sin is remitted by the Son of God, and overcome all the
difficulties of this life, the cause of which is sin.

L- XXIV. 484-486. interpretations on the prophets. \' W. VI. I99S-200I.
1367

This is what seemed necessary to us to remember about the first part of
this prayer. Now let us look at the rest.

The prophet is not satisfied with having taught that the people should
pray for forgiveness of sins and remission of right and eternal
punishment, but adds another part, commanding that they should also pray
that good may be given to them.

Here the reader must first note that the word is not always taken in the
same way. Sometimes it means a bodily blessing, as Ps. 25:13: \"His soul
shall dwell in goodness.\" Eccl. 8:13: \"It shall not prosper the
wicked.\" Gen. 45, 18.: \"I will give you goods in the land of Egypt.\"
Deut. 6:11: \"Houses full of all good things.\" Sometimes it is used for
what we commonly call good or right even before God, as Deut. 6, 18:
\"That you do what is right and good in the sight of the Lord.\" In the
Holy Scriptures, a \"good man\" is often mentioned instead of a
righteous man, as Ecclesiastes 9:2: \"There is one like another, the
righteous like the wicked, the good and pure like the unclean, the one
who sacrifices like the one who does not sacrifice. As it is to the
good, so it is to the sinner.\" Thus Christ says in the Gospel \[Matth.
19, 17.\]: \"No one is good, except the one God.\"

Therefore, what the prophet says in this passage, \"And do us good,\" I
put together in the simplest way with the previous piece: Take away the
sin that is evil, and give us that which is good, that is, the Holy
Spirit, who sanctifies us. For it is not enough that the past sin be
forgiven; it is necessary that the Holy Spirit 1) strengthen and govern
us, lest we, overcome by the devil and the flesh, fall back into the
former lusts of the flesh. For we are constantly struggling with this
enemy, who is most eager to draw us back into his kingdom and push us
out of the kingdom of Christ through disobedience. This, therefore, is
the work of the Holy Spirit, not only to sanctify us through faith in
Christ and to deliver us from sins, but also to

1\) Erlanger: yusrn instead of: yui.

Awaken us also to true obedience, that we may fight against sin and the
flesh, resisting the evil air 2c.

In Hebrew there is the word XXX, which is commonly translated by
\"receive\". It is the same word that is in the 68th Psalm, v. 19.
\"Thou hast received gifts for men.\" Paul translates it as we do \[Eph.
4:8.\], \"He hath given gifts unto men.\" But I wanted to use the word
\"Wohlthun\" (donandi \-\-- give) for the sake of this, so that the
reader would also be reminded here of the Wohlthat, by grace in vain.

You will say, \"Are works nothing? Do they not have any place in the
doctrine of repentance? I answer: So far we have spoken of the
forgiveness of sins and the bestowal of the Holy Spirit; this is
entirely by grace and free of charge, and is not in our merit, but
absolutely in the inexhaustible goodness and mercy of God. Therefore,
when we speak of the forgiveness of sins, we are rightly silent about
our works. Because these are done without the Holy Spirit, they cannot
and must not be called good, even though they are not evil in a civil
sense, because of the impure heart from which they come.

Since we have received the forgiveness of sins through faith and the
Holy Spirit at the same time. Since we have received the forgiveness of
sins and the Holy Spirit through faith, pure and pleasing works follow
from the heart as from a pure source. For even though the obedience of
the saints is not completely pure because of the remnants of sin, it is
pleasing and acceptable to God because of faith in Christ.

And these works are called the fruits of repentance. Among them, the
first is that which the prophet remembers here, that the tongues are
loosed in praise of God. For what can we wretched people do but praise
such great goodness? Thus it is said in the 116th Psalm, v. 12 ff: \"How
shall I repay the Lord for all his good deeds that he does for me? I
will take the cup of salvation,\" that is, I will patiently suffer
whatever comes my way, \"and preach the name of the Lord. I will pay my
vows to the Lord, above all his people.\" What.

1368 **XXIV, 486-188.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 14, 3. 4.
**W. VI, 2061-2004**. 1369

Are then these vows, this preaching of the name of God? Certainly this
humble confession \[Ps. 116, 16. f.\]: \"O Lord, I am your servant; I am
your servant, the son of your handmaid. You have broken my bonds. Unto
thee will I offer thanksgiving, and preach the name of the LORD.\"

Just as David calls this preaching of the benefits of God a sacrifice,
our Hosea says beautifully: \"We will sacrifice the bulls of our lips\",
as if he wanted to say: If the hypocrites are anxious to render the
highest service to God, then they sacrifice either an ox or calves, but
this is indeed an unreasonable service. In this way one does not serve
God. He wants His mercy to be known and preached, and He wants us to
rely on it and rejoice in it. This is the reasonable worship that cannot
be invented by the hypocrites, therefore pleases GOtte in truth; the
hypocritical sacrifices without this worship do not please GOtte.

In this way he compares the services of the Law with the services of the
New Testament. Of the latter he says that they are pleasing to God,
because they come from faith in the Son of God; but of the latter he
shows that they are not pleasing to God, because they are done by
hypocrites, who not only have impure hearts, but also want the praise of
righteousness and merit to be attached to them by God.

The prophet not only praises the services of the New Testament and
prefers them to the services of the law, but also indicates that it will
happen that through Christ, who will give the believers forgiveness of
sins, the legal priesthood together with the sacrifices will be
completely abolished, because the legal priesthood was bound to a
certain tribe. But since he says here, \"We will offer the bulls of our
lips,\" he indicates that this distinction of persons will be abolished,
and priests will be those who are pleasing to God, not those who are
born of the tribe of Levi, 1) but those who believe in Christ and in
true faith accept Christ.

1\) Erlanger: levinnti instead: I\^evi nsti.

as Peter says more clearly when he writes to those who believe in these
words \[1 Pet 2:9.j: \"You are the chosen generation, the royal
priesthood\" 2c.

What, therefore, do they have for a sacrifice? Not the opus operatum of
the mass, performed without faith, which the pope wants to remain with
his shamed and smeared heap alone. For as far as the forgiveness of sins
is concerned, the faithful have full sufficiency through the sacrifice
of Christ, him alone they acknowledge as the priest who has perfected
all the saints through the right sacrifice, but they offer in
thanksgiving, as the prophet here beautifully says, \"the farrows of
their lips.\" They call upon the name of the Lord, they preach his
mercy, they proclaim the death of their priest, and publicly praise his
sacrifice to all. But these are priests of the Most High, anointed not
by the popes but by the Holy Spirit, and yet they are not only despised
by that multitude whom the popes anoint, but are also condemned as
heretics, and subjected to every kind of ignominy and torture. But this
fruit of repentance is followed by others.

**V. 4. Asshur shall not help us, neither shall we ride upon horses any
more, nor say any more to the works of our hands: You are our God; but
let the fatherless find favor with you.**

Perhaps you wonder why he does not remember other works, charity toward
his neighbor, chastity, patience, humility? For all these fruits follow
true repentance. But the prophet, in a short sermon, indicates the main
parts of the first table, which are followed by the works of the second
table.

In an excellent way, he has summarized the most noble sins both in the
secular regime and in the church, which fight against the first table.
For what he says about \"Assur\" and the \"steeds\" is a common sin of
all kingdoms and commonwealths, namely the trust in human help, dignity,
wealth, power, honor 2c. Because people rely on these things, they
forget to trust in God. In dangers, they do not call upon God, they er-

1370 L. xxiv, 488-490. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
2004-200K. 137 t

do not wait for protection from God; as soon as there is fear of danger,
they turn to their counsel, seek help from their neighbors, make
alliances, put power and weapons together, and think that in this way
they will be completely safe.

But because this trust is connected with a dishonor against God, because
the creature is preferred to the Creator, it comes that it is
unfortunate, and it usually happens that those from whom one thought to
obtain salvation serve to ruin, as Isaiah prophesies of the help of the
Egyptians \[Isa. 36, 6.\], that Egypt will be like a reed; if one leans
on it, it cannot bear the load, but breaks and injures the hand. And
this was a peculiar sin of this people, as is evident from the sermons
of the prophets. But it was all the more serious because they abandoned
their trust in divine help and thought that there was more help to be
had from the heathen, whom they knew to be godless, even though they had
great wealth and power. That is why their saviors destroyed them.

Thus, in general, trust in human help overthrows all kingdoms, and yet
we, who see and know this, who pride ourselves on the possession of the
true religion, also follow these unfortunate footsteps. For what is the
use of alliances if princes and commonwealths do not have the confidence
that they will be safer in this way? We do not sufficiently believe that
God is powerful enough, we do not firmly believe that He will take care
of us and our cause, otherwise we would rely on His goodness and power
and not be so anxious to obtain carnal help.

But many are under the illusion that this is done without sin, and that
it is up to the civil authorities to take care of these attacks, and
that this should not be blamed by the church servants, since they have
to work in a different area. And I truly admit that this would be quite
well asserted if the civil authorities were not also commanded to place
all hope for help in God alone.

But, you will say, should one not even make use of weapons to protect
one\'s

protect? That is not the opinion at all. For God has given power to the
authorities for this reason. so that they might use it to protect their
own. But it is unfortunate when it is alone, that is, when it is without
trust in God, and it is blatantly blasphemous to trust in one\'s own
power or that of others. But because this ungodly trust is almost always
connected with covenants, the prophets condemn them everywhere,
especially when they are entered into with the ungodly, as the prophet
says to Jehoshaphat, 2 Chron. 20:37: \"Because thou hast joined thyself
to Ahaziah, the LORD hath broken thy works,\" that is, he hath not given
thee success.

That the holy church therefore says in this passage, \"Assyria shall not
help us,\" and likewise, \"We will no longer ride on horses,\" is the
same as saying, \"We will put away hope in all human help, and hope only
in the goodness of God, as it is said in Ps. 20:8, 9: \"They rely on
chariots and horses, but we remember the name of the Lord our God. They
have fallen down and fallen, but we stand upright.\" For even though a
godly authority makes use of chariots and horses, it still hopes for
victory from God and relies only on the help and blessing of the Lord,
not on its horses or armor. In this way, covenants can also take place
among the godly. Yes, we are already united with each other by the very
closest covenant of confession and hope. But people show their attitude
in many ways, that they enter into covenants with a different intention.

Furthermore, this teaching does not only apply to rulers and
communities, but it should also be a rule for private people in their
whole life and in all business, that they rely completely on God\'s
help, and just as abundance or power should not make us secure or puffed
up, so we should not lose courage through poverty or misfortune. For
here, too, hearts must be uplifted by trusting in the mercy of God when
we are plagued by sickness, poverty, unjust hatred 2c. This is the right
exercise

[1372 L, XXIV, 490-493. interpretation of Hosea (3.), cap. 14, 4. W. VI,
2006-2009. 1373]{.underline}

of the first commandment, that we firmly believe that God is our God and
cling to Him alone, both in misfortune and in happiness.

The other piece \"of the works of our hands\" goes to the church. For as
confidence in one\'s own power is the chief sin of kingdoms, so in the
church the chief sin is confidence in works. For it indicates not only
the gross idolatry, that they worshipped the images made by human hands,
as even now the abominable idolatry of the godless Pabstry is before our
eyes, where in one place the image pillar of Mary, in another that of
Anna and other saints are gloriously adorned and worshipped. For there
the idolaters fall on their knees, there they make vows, there they
think they will be heard through the intercession of such saints, who
make them patrons of their affairs, but the prophet also understands the
futile trust in their own works or merits. For monasticism is quite
rightly called a work of human hands, for at their own will, without
God\'s command, the monks choose a certain status by which they hope to
please God. Thus another, when he fasts, when he abstains from certain
foods on certain days, thinks that he is doing God a service. These are
the works of our hands, which the idolaters worship as a god. For
although they are nothing but human statutes, they have confidence that
God will be reconciled, honored and glorified in this way.

Thus the Israelites, when they sacrificed in certain places they had
chosen, when they slaughtered their children, when they fell down before
the images, made gods out of the works of their hands, that is, they
thought that in this way they were pleasing to God, that they were doing
Him a service, that they deserved forgiveness of sins 2c. This, says the
Church, we no longer want to do, because we know that the forgiveness of
sins is granted to us by grace through the Son of God; therefore, we
trust in the mercy of God alone; with this we are content, through it we
hope for forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

But the hearts that are enlightened in this way do not follow the flesh
or the

They do not fight the lusts of the flesh, but fight against the flesh
and look to the word, and do with great diligence everything that they
see is commanded by the word. Therefore they are not disobedient to
their parents and authorities, they do not kill, they do not bear
grudges, they are not unforgiving, they do not break marriage, they do
not fornicate, they seek their sustenance with their labor, they are
generous to the poor 2c. And these are the right fruits that follow
repentance and forgiveness of sins. Although they are often overcome by
sin and the flesh, God loves this obedience, however imperfect it may
be, because of faith in Christ, who takes away all sins, and promises
them rich rewards, both physical and spiritual.

This is the prayer for forgiveness of sins, which, as we have said,
indicates the right way to repent. -

But the prophet adds a piece: \"Let the orphans find grace with you\",
which is full of the most beautiful trust in God, without which a prayer
is in vain. This piece agrees with the saying of Christ \[John 14:18\]:
\"I will not leave you orphans. Likewise with the tenth Psalm, v. 14:
\"Thou art the helper of the fatherless.\" Likewise, v. 18: \"That thou
mayest do right to the fatherless and to the poor, that man may no
longer be ashamed upon the earth.\" All these sayings are rich in
glorious teaching and comfort when carefully considered.

The doctrine is that they present the image or the correct description
of the church, which in the world is like an underage or orphaned child,
for whom no one cares, indeed, whom everyone, because the opportunity is
favorable, desires to harm, while the world, on the other hand, is
equipped with wisdom, goods, power, justice, etc., on which it relies
and is hopeful. It is therefore not poor, not an orphan, but has in its
hands that on which it relies, and thinks that it is safe against all
misfortune and also against God\'s judgment.

Thus Nebuchadnezzar attributes to his wisdom the kingdom so mighty and
great. Haman relies on the king\'s favor; the Pharisee trusts in his
justice. In this way, people everywhere can be associated with carnal

1374 k. XXIV, 493-495. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. M09-20U.
1375

They will see themselves prepared for help, and therefore safe.
Therefore, if you compare these people with the church or individual
Christians, they will appear like a grown man who can defend himself
with his hand against injustice and govern his affairs with reason and
counsel, while the church, on the other hand, is like an orphan who is
without strength and counsel and therefore exposed to all injustices.

For the temples are before eyes, how one is used to treat the orphans.
For since the careful administration of justice, then also the sacred
obligation by oath, which in well-ordered communities the authorities
are accustomed to use for the benefit of the orphans, cannot prevent the
greed and disloyalty of men, what will happen where such barriers either
do not exist or are not so carefully observed? For it is a common thing
that even those who assume guardianship are more concerned with their
own benefit than with that of the orphans. What, therefore, is there to
fear from others, since there is so much danger from acquaintances and
friends! But even though they are good people who are made guardians,
what is their care and distress compared to the care of the parents?
Even if you do everything, even if you put all your efforts into it,
because the heartfelt affection that God has implanted in parents for
their children is not there, even the greatest diligence will be
considered nothing but neglect. \'

This, says the Prophet, will be the fate and situation of Christians or
the Church in this world. They will be orphans, they will have no
parents to anxiously care for them and protect them. Yes, they will also
have Satan himself as their enemy; he will not cease to plague them with
misfortune of every kind through his members. For even though Christians
have the blessing of the Lord and possess goods, they possess them in
such a way that they are in danger even of their lives because of their
confession and faith. Then they do not rely on their wisdom, for they
see that it is very little and a weak spark that they cannot safely
follow in such great darkness. Therefore, they judge that another,
greater light is coming.

that cannot be so easily extinguished by the devil. This is the word of
God; they rely on it and believe that they will be safe only through it.
But they turn their wisdom to the lesser matters, which the necessities
of temporal life bring with them. But when it comes to the dangers of
sin and death, they really consider themselves orphans, with no ability
to stand against such powerful enemies.

Therefore the prophet interprets exactly by this designation, what he
had wanted to say, since he said above: \"Assur shall not help us, and
we do not want to ride on horses any more, also we do not want to say
any more to the works of our hands: You are our God,\" namely that the
Church is deprived of all protection in this world. The godly are
generally lacking in the goods of fortune and the splendor of riches, as
Paul says \[1 Cor. 1, 26.f: \"Not many mighty according to the flesh,
not many noble\" 2c., and although some are adorned with the blessing of
God, they have it as if they did not have it, as Paul says \[1 Cor. 7,
30. ff.

David is a king, adorned with dignity, power and wealth, and yet he says
of himself, Ps. 39:13: \"Be not silent concerning my tears: for I am
both thy pilgrim and thy citizen, as are all my fathers.\" He calls
himself a pilgrim for no other reason than because he believes that even
though he has many bodily gifts, they last only for a moment, when they
suddenly either leave us or are left by us when we are called away from
this life.

We are reminded of this situation by the prophet, who calls us
\"orphans\". For he teaches that we should not lose heart because of
impatience, but that when we are in danger, we should think that we are
orphans. If you are sick, do not be anxious in your heart, but remember
that you are a part of the church and, as it were, an orphan lying in
the cradle and in need of help from others. If you suffer any damage to
your property, remember: I am an orphan, therefore I am treated badly,
not only by strangers, but also by acquaintances and friends.

1376 **L. XXIV, 4S5-497.** interpretation of Hosea (3rd), cap. 14, 4. W.
**VI. 2011-2014.** 1377

Those who are close to us. For the judgment is certain (2 Tim. 3, 12.):
\"All who want to live godly in Christ must suffer persecution.\" But
this must be held even more firmly in the matters of conscience, when
you are challenged by sin, by fear of death, by the sensation of God\'s
wrath and judgment: then consider rightly that you are in truth an
orphan, but therefore not rejected by God, for here you hear a glorious
consolation and an exceedingly beautiful description of God.

The prophet describes the church in such a way that its members are
orphans who suffer and cannot defend themselves against injustice; that
is truly bitter and miserable. But now listen to what he preaches about
God and with what colors he paints him. He says: \"Let the fatherless
find grace with you.\" So the underage and the orphans have a merciful
and gracious GOtt.

Therefore, just as the first description takes away from the godly all
the support of the world, which the world greatly esteems, admires, by
which it triumphs against the godly and oppresses them, so here he gives
them everything, since he says that God has mercy on the orphans. For if
God is merciful, if He has a fatherly disposition toward the afflicted
Christians, what can we still lack in any thing? We may lack goods, but
we have eternal treasures; we may lack power, and tyrants may oppress
us, but we have the LORD above all lords, who will redeem us in His time
with an eternal salvation. We may lack honor and dignity, and the world
may heap shame upon us, but we have Him who will surround us with
everlasting glory, for so the prophet comforts us in this passage,
saying, \"The fatherless shall find grace in thy sight.\"

If we could take this into our hearts, we could, as Paul says (Rom. 5,
3.), boast even in tribulations. It is a great misfortune that the
excellent man, who is distinguished both in doctrine and in godly life,
Hieronymus Baumgärtner, when he returned home from the Diet of Speier as
a deputy of his city (Nuremberg), was caught before the eyes of the
emperor and subjected to long and very hard torture.

is held in captivity\'. Therefore, he feels that he is a minor or an
orphan, and we are rightly moved by the misfortune of the excellent man
who has rendered extraordinary service to his city and to the Church of
Christ. But again, we must be comforted by the fact that because he is
an orphan, he also has a gracious God who will save him in his time and
adorn him with eternal glory in a better life.

But you will say: Why is this mercy not seen? I answer, These things
must be joined together, first, that thou thinkest thyself an orphan;
secondly, that thou thinkest that God is gracious. And the former is the
former in order, but this is the later; the former is harsh, the latter
pleasant, the latter heavy, the latter sweet. Hence it is that we desire
to enjoy this, not to have that. But this is how it is decided, if you
want to obtain mercy, you must first become an orphan, and you must not
want to determine how long you want to be an orphan, because even a
short delay seems to be very long when the cross presses us. The care of
salvation must be left to God, who is a helper in due time (Ps. 9, 10.
Vulg.), and is also faithful, therefore he does not let us be tempted
above our ability \[1 Cor. 10, 13.\]. And even though he postpones
salvation, he will surely bring it about, for he is our Father.
Therefore, if we ask him for bread, he will not offer us a stone, and if
we ask him for an egg, he will not offer us a scorpion for it \[Luc. 11,
11. f.\]. He knows what we need, and will gladly give it to us, as
follows. For he is merciful, that is, he has a fatherly disposition
toward us, only we do not have to doubt his mercy.

In this way we must take comfort in our own peril and that of others.
But we must remember that this comfort is held out to those who repent.
The world also feels its adversity, for God does not always turn a blind
eye to sins. Therefore, when it is beset by punishments, it expects
mercy in vain, as the examples of Absalom, Ahitophel, Ammon show; for
they do not repent, therefore they perish in the wrath of God.

**1378** L. XXIV, 497-499. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
MI4-20IS. **1379**

**V. 5. so I will heal their cessation, gladly will I love them; then my
wrath shall turn from them.**

A promise is attached to the prayer so that the hearts will be fixed
that they will surely be heard when they ask for forgiveness of sins. In
other dangers belonging to this life, we add the condition of God\'s
will when we ask for salvation, that God will hear us if it is His will.
For indeed we do not know what is good for us, and God is wont to show
His power mightily in the weak \[2 Cor. 12:9\], that is, when we are
weak, He shows that we are not preserved and protected by human counsel
or our strength, but by divine power. Therefore Paul prays in vain for
salvation, that he may not be beaten with fists by Satan\'s angel \[2
Cor. 12:7\]. David prays in vain for the life of his son \[2 Sam. 12:16,
18\]. Jacob prays in vain for his wife, since she was in mortal peril at
birth \[Gen. 35:17\]. These were physical dangers.

But the church in this world is subject to the cross. Although she
therefore asks for salvation from such physical misfortune, and also
hopes for salvation (for prayer cannot be without faith), she
nevertheless commands herself to the will of God and, as Peter says,
humbles herself under the mighty hand of God, that is, urges the
fulfillment of her will in such a way that she nevertheless prefers the
will of God to it. Lazarus, in his so great misery and in so great
torments, asks for salvation, and yet decides with himself that he will
obey God and endure these tribulations, if it so pleases God. We should
do the same in our perils or in our misfortunes.

But if it is necessary to pray for forgiveness of sins, for
sanctification by the Holy Spirit and for eternal life, then the
condition of God\'s will need not be added. For God\'s will is already
evident and certain that He wants all people to be saved, that He wants
to forgive sins, that He wants to make the

He wants to give us the Holy Spirit. Therefore, we must ask for these
things with certain confidence, without adding any condition, because it
was for this very reason that he could give us these things by grace
that he sent his Son into this world. And the Son of God Himself
suffered and died for His sake, rose from the dead and ascended to
heaven for His sake, leaving behind the commandment that repentance and
forgiveness of sins should be preached in His name \[Luc. 24, 47.\]. For
this purpose he instituted baptism, gave the keys to the church, and
gave us his body and blood as food. Finally, he added the promise that
the Father would give us everything we ask in his name \[John 16:23\].

Therefore, not even our unworthiness and our sins should take away this
confidence, but rather our sins should exhort and drive us to pray, as
the prophet indicates here. For if our sins prevented us from being
heard, truly the prophet would not command the rest of Israel to ask for
forgiveness, not for minor sins, but for the most grievous sins of
idolatry, denial of God, superstition, blasphemy, murder of the saints
2c. But he not only commands them to pray and open their mouths against
God who is so offended, but also adds promises. For hear what the Lord
himself says here to sinners who repent and hope in his mercy.

\"I,\" he says, \"will heal their departing.\" This is truly the highest
sin, that one departs from God, does not care for the word and even
rages cruelly against the servants of the word. For it is because of
these sins that the ten tribes have been completely devastated. And yet
God promises that He will grant mercy to those who ask Him for it for
these sins and forgive them. Why, therefore, would you despair? Why
would you not straighten up and, trusting in Christ, also ask for
forgiveness of sins? For the matter does not rest on your or your
prayer\'s worthiness or merit, but on the Son of God alone. If you

1380 L. XXIV, 4U-ÜV1. interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 14, 5. W. VI,
201K-2YI9. 1381

If you take him in faith that he has done enough for you, that God is
reconciled to you through him, your prayer is answered.

This is the first part of the promise that the Lord will heal our
resignation, by which we are poisoned to death with the most harmful
poison.

The other part is that he freely and with great kindness wants to love
sinners who repent and pray. For the Hebrew word means both willingness
and generosity, as these are also connected with each other by nature.
For where there is a right love, not a forced love, not a foolish love,
but a love that flows from a certain judgment, there is no measure of
service and benevolence.

I beg you, what tongue can properly pronounce this promise? We can
certainly use an example from the household, which is known to us, that
we remember what kind of heart we have for our spouse and our children,
but afterwards we will have trouble convincing ourselves that we too are
so loved by God. For our hearts are too narrow to contain such great
things. The one whom you love in truth owns all that is yours, even your
life, and more than you yourself. Therefore, the love which the Lord
promises us in this passage as a voluntary and abundant one brings to us
all that God is and has, so that we too are masters of sin, death, hell,
the devil and all creatures. For who can be against us if God is for us?
\[Rom. 8, 31.\]

In some places the Scripture ascribes to God such a love as spouses have
for each other, as Christ, praising the mercy of God, presents the
parable of the wedding \[Matth. 22, 2\], and Paul calls married life a
great mystery \[Eph. 5, 32\].

But we must be mindful that this love is hidden under the cross in this
life; therefore faith is necessary, which firmly holds that these
promises are true. For he who follows feelings or appearances will judge
that the Church is not loved by God with conjugal love,

1\) Jenaer: ktultus; Wittenberger and Erlanger: stnlus.

but it is either neglected or even hated. Therefore one must close the
eyes of the flesh and accept this in faith, as Paul says \[Rom. 8,
24.\]: \"We are blessed, but in hope.\" But this will be revealed when
Christ reveals Himself to us, and this flesh, which is full of sin, will
be cast off.

The following piece: \"Then my wrath shall turn from them\", seems to be
superfluous. Because where there is love, anger and hatred are excluded.
But there was a great reason why the Lord added this piece. Because, as
we have already said, the love with which the Lord embraces his own, as
a bridegroom embraces his bride, is hidden under the cross, and cannot
be seen with carnal eyes, so the flesh frets, and thinks, when it feels
the temptation and dangers, that it is not loved by God. This piece now
serves to remove this annoyance, for it makes a distinction between the
cross of the saints and the punishments of the wicked.

The saints, that is, those who believe in Christ, have forgiveness of
sins and are loved by God, and yet they are subjected to many
misfortunes, to such an extent that their situation seems to be worse
than that of the godless, who usually prosper and have abundance of all
things. But this happens not because God loves these people, but hates
the godly. The Holy Spirit says in this passage, \"My wrath shall turn
from them.\" Therefore, just as a father chastises the son whom he
loves, so also here the highest love is connected with the rod, but the
Lord is angry with the wicked who are well off, and is angry in such a
way that his anger has no measure forever, if they do not repent.

Therefore, this piece serves to lift the vexation, so that when we are
afflicted by the cross, we do not think that God is afflicting us. He
does not hate those who repent and ask for forgiveness of sins, even
though He allows them to be afflicted. Wrath and anger are turned away
from them, but remain upon those who do not repent, who surely live in
sins, and do not seek forgiveness of sins through prayer.

1382 L- xxiv, 501-503. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
2019-2022. 1383

What follows now serves to explain the last-mentioned piece of the
promise of love.

**V. 6-8: I will be to Israel as a dew, and it shall blossom as a rose;
and its roots shall shoot forth as Lebanon; and its branches shall
spread, and it shall be as beautiful as an olive tree; and it shall give
as good a smell as Lebanon. And they shall sit again under his shadow;
they shall feed on corn, and blossom as a vine; his memory shall be as
the wine of Lebanon.**

This also belongs to the promises. For what the prophet had said before
simply and without a picture, he says here in pictures and presents as
in a painting the description of the church that believes in Christ, how
it is constituted before God and with what gifts it is adorned.

The Jews recognize that this is said of the time of the Messiah.
Therefore, when they hear that parables of bodily things are presented,
they expect from the Messiah benefits for this life, and think that when
he will come, he will adorn his people with bodily blessings, that they
shall blossom like a rose, like a tree that has driven its roots deep
and spread its branches, which is not only lovely to look at, but also
firm against the violence of the winds and the storms. Thus the Jews
would be an object of wonder to all the Gentiles throughout the earth,
and they alone would reign everywhere. They do not even dream of the
forgiveness of sins, the gift of the Holy Spirit and eternal life. This
blindness comes from the fact that they do not know whose son the
Messiah is, because they think that he is only David\'s son, therefore
they expect nothing but human and temporal things from him as a man.

Furthermore, they do not see that this nature is so corrupted by sin
that it cannot work itself out of the wrath and judgment of God. For if
they believed that, they would look for help from others, which they now
so surely miss in this blindness, since it is offered by the Son of God.

negligent. Therefore, they forget the saying that the prophet said just
before, comparing the church to an orphan, that it is oppressed in many
ways in the world and has no strength against the most powerful enemies,
the devil, sin and death. Since the Jews do not see this, it is not
surprising that they are only concerned with temporal gain and do not
even see the shadow of these promises.

We are better informed. We know that man has fallen into God\'s wrath
and eternal death through sin, but that God had mercy on us and sent His
Son, who did not take care of bodies and goods, as the kings of the
world do, but brought us forgiveness of sins and reconciled us to the
Father, freeing us from eternal death and all the tyranny of Satan, as
the prophet said shortly before \[v. 5.\] that God would heal the
resignation of those who convert, and love them, and turn away His wrath
from them. These are the goods of which the Church rejoices, and thanks
GOtte for them. The blind Jews, however, do not see this at all and are
therefore extremely ungrateful to God.

Therefore, the church has both. She is an orphan and yet also the
mistress of all things. She is an orphan because, although she has
immense eternal gifts, the Word and the knowledge of God, the
forgiveness of sins, righteousness, eternal life, yes, also God, who
dwells in her and governs her with the Holy Spirit, she is nevertheless
subject to the cross by heart, because in the meantime the godless have
the kingdoms of the world, the goods, the pleasures, the honor of the
world. But again, she is still the mistress of all things, in faith and
hope. For though she has no bodily protection in this world, yet as an
orphan she expects protection from God, and knows in certain faith that
she cannot be destroyed by the tyrants, and obtains glorious salvation
in many great perils. Moreover, she also has comfort through the hope of
the future glory, as Paul says \[Rom. 5:2\]: \"We boast in the hope of
the future glory that God shall give,\" which will be seen in the
eternal

1384 **L. LLIV. 503-505.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 14, 6-8.
**W. VI, 2022-2024.** 1385

Fellowship with GOD, with Christ, with the fathers, prophets, apostles
and all the elect.

But the godless: do not see this: comfort of faith and hope, not this
dominion, which is covered by the cross 1), they only see the hardships
and misfortune, and therefore think that God does not care about the
church, and judge that it is in truth a miserable orphan and abandoned.
But they seek wealth and power for themselves, so that they may be safe
or can comfort themselves with the hope of human protection.

Whoever looks at this with the \"fleshly eye\" will say with David \[Ps.
37:35\] that the wicked are like a strong tree that is well leafy and
green like a laurel tree, like a lovely, beautiful meadow that is
adorned with flowers of every kind. If one compares the church with
these, it will seem like a withering tree, on which not only no fruits
hang, but also not even a few leaves. For even the church, which almost
collapses under the burden of sins, testifies sufficiently with its own
voice (as it prays \[v. 3\]: \"Forgive us all our sins, and do us
good\"), in what a situation it is, how afflicted and miserable it is.

This is the first painting of the church, which shows what the church is
like in terms of this physical life. The Jews completely forget this
painting, because they dream that through the mediation of the Messiah
they will seize all the kingdoms and protections of the world. For they
do not want to be orphans in this world, they want to rule and have
abundance of goods, therefore they turn away from the poor and miserable
church.

But if you turn your eyes a little away from this life, and judge the
church according to the hope that it receives from the word, then its
appearance will seem completely different to you. For it has God, who
heals the most serious evil, sin; who embraces it with such love as
spouses have for each other, and bestows upon it all the good things
that he has and possesses. What tongue can talk out such great goods,
such adornment?

1\) Erlanger: rectuni instead of: tsotuw.

Therefore, she, who in the eyes of the world and in her own eyes is like
an enfeebled and dry tree, blossoms like a rose in the eyes of God, not
because of her strength or her righteousness or other gifts, but because
the Lord is like a dew to her, that is, because the Lord brings
righteousness, takes away sin, gives the Holy Spirit, awakens faith,
obedience, hope, patience, charity, and other virtues pleasing to God.
For the likeness of the rose includes both the beauty that it is lovely
to look at and the fragrance that it spreads far and wide. For the works
of the saints are pleasing to God for the sake of faith in Christ, even
though they are small and mean in appearance.

But the likeness of the dew that comes from heaven is for you to firmly
believe that all these things happen to us from your merciful Father for
the sake of the Son who is sent to us, not because of our merits or
gifts or because of anything we do.

Furthermore, this heavenly dew of grace is followed by other gifts,
namely that the church, like a tree of Lebanon, stands firm by strong
roots. For it has the world and the devil as enemies, who constantly
attack it. But because it is built on the rock of Christ, even the gates
of hell cannot overcome or overthrow it.

The third gift is that its branches spread, that is, not only cannot it
be suppressed, but it even increases in the dangers themselves. For the
individual members of the church 2) grow daily in the knowledge of God
and other exercises of godliness, and the whole church body also grows
daily.

The fourth is that the church is beautiful as an olive tree, and spreads
its good smell far and wide like Mount Lebanon. This agrees with what we
have said above about the rose, only that here also an increase in gifts
is indicated. For the oil tree is very fruitful, and the fruitfulness of
Lebanon is also known from pagan writings.

2\) Erlanger: eatüssia instead of: eeetesiae.

1386 D- xxiv, 506-508. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi,
2024-2027. 1387

The fifth is that the church, like a tree, will also give shade to those
who are weary in the heat. This is a special and glorious gift, that the
church alone has true comfort against sin and death and all the wiles of
the devil. Therefore we rest in her as under a shady tree and breathe
again, because the word XXXX, convertentur, is to be taken in this place
as in the 19th Psalm, v. 8: \"The law of the Lord is without change\",
XXX XXXX, con

vertens animas[, that is, \"that restores the soul\", makes it alive
again, as we also use to say in German: \"Er ist wieder zu sich
kommen\"; likewise: \"Er kehret wieder\", when those who are lifeless
breathe again. For this is peculiar to the word, that it sets the heart
right, and shows the hope of salvation and help in temptation and danger
itself, as the Psalm says more clearly shortly after \[v. 9\]: \"The
commands of the Lord are right, and gladden the heart.\"]{.underline}

Therefore, the Holy Spirit understands not only the Word, but also the
visible and outward signs, baptism and the Lord\'s Supper, which Christ
instituted so that through them we might have comfort against sin, death
and the devil. For when you are baptized, it is for this reason that you
may believe that you have been adopted by God as a child through
Christ\'s death; but when we partake of Holy Communion, we are not only
reminded of the forgiveness of sins obtained through Christ\'s death,
but the ransom itself, with which the forgiveness of sins is purchased,
is given to us, namely the body of Christ to eat and the blood of Christ
to drink, so that we may firmly believe that the forgiveness of sins
belongs to us. Therefore, hearts that are afraid of God\'s wrath and
eternal punishment because of sin rest here as under a shadow.

The sixth is that they should feed on grain. Here, too, the teaching and
the word are praised, through which the hearts are richly fed and
strengthened. Thus Christ comforts the apostles \[Luc. 22, 30.): \"Ye
shall eat and drink above my table in my kingdom.\" But it means certain
knowledge of God,

which the word shows. But for this reason he says, \"Let them feed on
grain,\" to indicate that the world, which does not have the Word,
though it boasts of worship and concern for religion, feeds, as it were,
on chaff, but the church has the right pasture by which hearts are
strengthened and richly nourished.

The seventh is that the church should blossom like a vine. This actually
refers to the fruits that grow in the church from the constant use of
the word. The world does not admire these fruits, but does not pay
attention to them, but occupies itself with other things that have a
greater appearance. Thus the papists despise domesticity and worldly
rule, and choose another state, that they live individually in
monasteries. But God makes a different judgment: these self-chosen works
and services are an abomination to Him, but He loves what He has
commanded, even if it is of little importance.

The eighth is that he says that the memory of the church should be like
the wine of Lebanon, that is, become famous. This piece also belongs to
the price of the church, and it is necessary because of the immense
astonishment with which the church is so oppressed that it can hardly be
recognized. For look at the patriarchs, look at the prophets and
apostles, how they are kept in the world. Yes, Christ, the Son of God
and the Head of the Church, how shamefully he is treated by his people!
They cry out that he is possessed by the devil, a winebibber, a rebel, a
blasphemer.

Today, as even the adversaries testify, we have the sacraments again in
their entirety, and a doctrine that agrees with the writings of the
apostles; these are the most distinguished signs of the true church. And
yet, what a judgment we have to suffer! We are condemned as heretics, we
are blasphemed as a ruin of the church, and as destroyers of all
respectability and discipline. These, however, are the most dreadful of
invectives, which, no doubt, so move the hearts of many that they have a
horror even of our name. But, as I said, if you read the histories of
Christ, the Son of God, the Baptist, the

1388 L. XXIV, SSS-S10. Interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 14, 6-9. W.
VI, 2027-2029. 1389

If you look at the apostles, the prophets, we suffer nothing new.

And it is not by chance that the prophet uses the parable of wine in
this passage, when he speaks of the memory or name of the church and the
saints. For this is a price, not of must or new wine, but of old wine,
that it may be fragrant. Only the noblest wines can grow old. In this
way, the church and all its members are for a time without odor in the
world; indeed, they stink before the world, for they are defiled with
abominable revilings. But what does the Psalm say: \"The righteous is
never forgotten\" \[Ps. 112, 6\], while the memory of the wicked
perishes with them, Ps. 9, 6. Thus the situation of Paul, Peter and
other apostles was a miserable one, considering the power, dignity and
wealth of the adversaries, but just as noble wines produce fragrance
from themselves with age, so the glory of the godly grows after death,
according to the saying \[Ps. 116, 15\]: \"The death of his saints is
worthy in the sight of the Lord,\" but the wicked perish like bad wine.

This is therefore a glorious consolation and an exceedingly lovely
description of the church, not as it is in the world or in appearance,
but as it is in spirit and before God. For if you follow the appearance,
you will find the opposite in everything. She is like a tree without
sap, scrawny, weak, shapeless, and also full of ailments; therefore the
world, which has riches and dignities, and for that reason is esteemed
like a rose that blossoms and has sprouted deep roots, has an
abomination against her, as if she were a corpse that stinks for miles
around.

But be careful not to be deceived by appearances. For from the word one
must form his judgment and bring these things out of the world before
God\'s face, then it will come to light that those who do not have the
word and 1) the right knowledge of God, and therefore are without the
Holy Spirit, and are still in their sins, even though they have power
and riches, nevertheless grow old like a tree, wither, and die in the

1\) Erlanger: ex statt: st.

Root corrupt, for in the eyes of God they stink, but in themselves they
are not only weak but also restless.

But this is indicated by the prophets for this reason, so that the
church may take comfort in the face of both adversities and not be
troubled or despondent either by its misery or by the welfare of the
adversaries, but look to the end. For in this way it will happen that
she will be able to bear the present adversity with equanimity and will
even suffer over the misfortune of the wicked, who are more moved by the
small comfort of such a short time than by the eternal torments. The
prophet now summarizes this, as it were, in a bundle and speaks:

**V. 9. Ephraim, what shall the idols be to me? I will listen to him and
lead him; I will be like a green fir tree; in me your fruit will be
found.**

Because the frequent change of persons, which is found in the Hebrew,
makes the thing dark, I wanted to use the second person everywhere. But
here is a glorious and truly prophetic movement of the heart. For,
inflamed as it were by the mention of the benefits of the New Testament
and the abundant grace that is to be granted to the faithful through the
Son of God, he now turns to his people and finally admonishes them that
they should renounce idolatry and follow the word of God.

As if he wanted to say: What a great misfortune it is that you cannot be
dissuaded from the false worship and the godless teaching! Why do you
not realize that you are deceived by worshipping such gods, who neither
hear you in danger nor look at you, but abandon you and let you perish
completely? Why do you not rather turn to him who hears his own and
leads them out of dangers, yes, even adorns his own with various gifts?

Therefore, this passage also contains a glorious description of God,
that God is in truth one who hears, protects and adorns His own. Hearing
presupposes dangers, for these provoke prayer. Therefore, the Church has
this promise that, even though it is not

[1390 L. XXIV. SIV-V12. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI.
ro29-M8L. 1391]{.underline}

will be without danger, but God will hear them. However, this comfort is
connected with an annoyance that offends the flesh. For God tends to
postpone the answer so that He may prove our faith and show His power
and glory, since He saves when we despair of salvation.

The second is the government, the protection, the defense. For the word
XXX means to look at something with attentive and unblinking eyes, \"to
look carefully and diligently at a thing. Thus the prophet used this
word in the thirteenth chapter, v. 7: \"I will watch for them like a
hawk on the road,\" that is, I will take care that they do not escape.
And Jer. 5:26: \"For wicked men are found among my people, setting traps
for the people,\" that is, they are diligent to do harm, like the
bird-catchers when they follow the birds.

In this way, the Lord promises in this passage that he will look upon
his own with unwavering eyes and rule in such a way that nothing bad
will happen to them. But even to this promise an annoyance is attached,
for the godly are treated as if God did not see it, as the 94th Psalm,
v. 6. f., says: \"Widows and strangers they strangle, and slay the
fatherless, saying, The LORD seeth it not, and the God of Jacob
respecteth it not.\" And Ps. 64:6: \"They make designs how they will lay
cords, and say: Who can see them 1)?\" Therefore, not only do the godly
consider that they are missed by God in dangers, but the security of the
godless becomes so great through this restraint of God that they
convince themselves that God does not care about the godly who oppress
them, nor do they see what they are doing. But what does the Lord say in
this passage? I look upon him with great care.

Therefore, faith should comfort itself with this word, 2) should firmly
hold that it will not be neglected, even though for a time it is as it
were before one\'s eyes that GOD will certainly

1\) Instead of nos we have assumed kos according to our Bible and the
Vulgate.

2\) Jenaer: oonsoletur, Wittenberger and Erlanger: eon8olatur. We have
followed the former reading.

Do not worry about him, as his lot in Sodom is a good example. The
inhabitants of Sodom treat him in the most shameful way, and there is
already a danger that the doors will be broken down by force. Who would
believe that the Lord would have his eyes open and see this, since he is
silent to the utmost of the wicked? And yet he sees it, for when the
danger is greatest, Lot is seized by the angels, and the wicked are
struck with blindness, finally also consumed by fire that fell from
heaven. Therefore, the Lord sees both the danger of Lot and the
wickedness of the wicked. In this way, we too should wait and persevere
for the Lord, who does not close his eyes completely, but keeps a
watchful eye on his own and preserves them, as he promises here.

The third is of the fruit: \"I will be like a green fir tree; in me
shall thy fruit be found.\" This saying agrees with Christ\'s saying
\[John 4:5\], \"I am the vine, ye are the branches.\" \[V. 4.:\] \"As
the branch cannot bring forth fruit of itself, but abideth in the vine;
so neither can ye, but abideth in me.\"

First, however, the fruits of which the prophet speaks must be
described. These are not vain endeavors and hypocritical works, but the
true knowledge of God and the right obedience to the law and eternal
life. These fruits, says the Lord, are found in him. Therefore, free
will, our mind, our reason, our will, our intentions, though it is best
if they are alone, that is, if we have not received the Holy Spirit, are
like a barren tree on which no fruit is found.

On the other hand, in those who remain in Christ as branches on the
vine, that is, who believe in Christ and firmly believe that through
Christ their sins have been paid for and they are reconciled to God, the
Holy Spirit is powerful, so that they are obedient to the Word and
obtain the fruit of their faith, eternal life.

Therefore, two conclusions are drawn at this point, which the pope
condemns as certain heresy. The first is that the

1392 **L. XXIV, 512-514.** interpretation of Hosea (3.), Cap. 14, 9. 10.
**W. VI, 2032-2034.** 1393

Man, insofar as he is man, without the Holy Spirit, is a barren tree and
cannot attain salvation. The second is that we attain eternal life
through faith in Christ without our merit only by grace. For the saying
is clear: \"In me your fruit shall be found,\" and John 15:4: \"Unless
you abide in me, you cannot bear fruit.

These are wonderful consolations that should move us to unite with the
true church, which firmly holds that we are granted forgiveness of sins
and eternal life only by grace through faith in Christ. But this church
has God, who hears it in dangers, looks after it, and adorns His own
with various gifts, while the others, who rely on their righteousness
and their merits, even though they flourish for a time (for the
beginnings of idolatry are brilliant and happy), will be like a tree
whose leaves wither, and like a garden that has no water, as Isaiah Cap.
1, 30. threatens.

**V. 10 Who is wise that understandeth these things, and prudent that
knoweth them? For the ways of the Lord are right, and the righteous walk
therein, but the transgressors fall therein.**

This is a wonderful and almost unusual conclusion to these sermons, but
extraordinarily clever and appropriate, considering the nature of the
word and the customs of the people. It is clear that Hosea was the first
to bring the message that the kingdom of Israel would be devastated by
the Assyrians. But because under Jeroboam, a happy king, the kingdom of
Israel flourished, the people were deafened by the prosperity, and
dreamed that this happy state would last permanently, but in great
certainty despised the threats of the prophet.

The prophet sees this and, consoling himself against this certainty of
his people, he breaks out into these words: \"Who is wise who
understands this? As if he wanted to say: The largest part of the people
are fools, they let themselves be beguiled by the present happiness,
they despise the threats, they reject the teachings. These may perish
after all, since they do not want to be taught. But who

There will be some wise people who will understand that these threats
are not in vain. Therefore, they will humble themselves under the mighty
hand of God, ask for forgiveness of sins, and comfort themselves with
the hope of the future sacrifice for sins in common misfortune.

However, it is customary in Scripture to call those wise and prudent who
accept and honor the word or fear the Lord, as opposed to those who
reject the fear of God and the word and safely give themselves over to
the lusts and doings of this world, completely unconcerned about the
wrath and judgment of God. But if anyone wants to make a distinction
between wisdom and prudence, let him attach prudence to the life and
customs established according to God\'s word, but wisdom to faith and
the right knowledge of God. For these are connected with each other, and
a holy life pleasing to God always follows true faith.

Therefore, this is the opinion: Those who fear God, of course, do not
despise these threats, but will improve their lives and strive to obey
God, will no longer provoke him with ungodly life and ungodly worship.
But because the rest of the people are fools, they will continue in
their godlessness.

But why does this happen? Why does not the greater part accept the word?
Is not the doctrine good because of this? As our adversaries do
nowadays, because there are many aversions among us, and few lead a life
worthy of their profession, accuse the doctrine and condemn it as evil,
and as if it gave rise to these aversions. The doctrine, says the
prophet, need not therefore be accused, \"for the ways of the Lord are
right,\" that is, the doctrine is holy and godly, and those who accept
it walk aright. \"The righteous,\" he says, \"walk in it.\" For those
who accept the word are justified and live, because they believe GOtte,
who promises forgiveness of sins and eternal life through the future
seed. But the wicked, who reject the word, \"fall within\", not because
of guilt

1394 L xxiv. 514-517. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. E-E. 1395

of doctrine, which can do nothing but save and justify, but by their own
fault. For those who reject salvation must necessarily perish.

Therefore this saying agrees with the words of Simeon \[Luc. 2, 34.\]:
\"This one is set for a fall and rising of many in Israel, and for a
sign that is contradicted.\" Likewise with the words of Christ \[Joh.
12, 47. f.\]: \"I am not come to judge the world, but to save the world.
He that despiseth me, and receiveth not my words, hath already he that
judgeth him; the. The word which I have spoken, the same shall judge him
at the last day.\" And John 3:18: \"He that believeth not is judged
already.\" For as the prophet here names the right ways of the Lord for
the righteous to walk in, so Christ says that by his word he brings life
to those who believe. But those who do not believe, but like the
Pharisees and priests either reject it or despise it, must be deprived
of life and be plunged into eternal death and damnation.

In this way, the holy prophet consoles himself against the violent and
immense anger that so few take the floor and follow him. And by his
example he also wants to strengthen us, so that we do not throw away the
right doctrine or begin to hate it because the greater part sins all the
more unrestrainedly. For this does not happen through the guilt of the
doctrine, as if it were evil, but

This is the work of Satan, who incites the hearts against the word, as
Christ teaches about the weeds in the good field, which grow up under
the good seed \[Matth. 13, 26\].

Therefore, we should not lose heart, but remember that the same troubles
followed those holy prophets whose disciples we can hardly be called. As
they comforted themselves against these troubles, so shall we also
comfort ourselves, and it shall be enough for us that there are at least
a few wise and prudent ones who do not neglect the Word with the rest of
the great multitude, but recognize their sins, amend and ask for
forgiveness of sins, and are content with the promises given by the Son
of God to all who believe in him. Let it be enough for us to rise from
death and from sins; let the rest go, because they do not want to be
saved from destruction. For why do they not accept the word? Why do they
not rely on Christ, the Son of God, who was set by the Father Himself to
be the resurrection and the life for us who fall and lie down because of
sin?

But we want to give thanks to the merciful and eternal Father of our
Savior and Mediator JEsu Christ for this supreme gift, that he has
revealed this right way to us, and we pray that he may govern us, who
walk on it, through his Holy Spirit and sustain us for eternity. Amen.

End of the interpretation on the prophet Hosea.

**The most distinguished doctrines and the main sayings in the sermons
of the prophet Hosea.**

We want to briefly summarize all the sermons of Hosea, so that if you
cannot grasp the whole book, you may still remember what is the main
point.

Hosea is mainly concerned with this and deals in almost all chapters
with the punishment of the idolatry of his people and with the
punishment of the

desolation by the Aesyrians. But this idolatry consisted in the fact
that, since by God\'s commandment all services were bound to the temple
at Jerusalem, ten tribes did not respect the temple and erected altars
and sacrificed wherever they pleased.

An idolatry, which is equal to this, have

1396 L. XXIV, SN-SI9. the main sayings in Hosea. W. VI, 2037-2040. 1597

We also nowadays, although we were commanded to call upon the eternal
Father in the name of Jesus, we have set aside Christ and called upon
the saints, thinking that Christ is like a tyrant or a harsh judge who
will not listen unless we have intercessors, while He Himself wants to
be our mediator with God.

Just as the Jews erected the idols of Baal, the calves and other images,
we also began to worship images, and believed that God was more inclined
to grace this or that image than if we prayed either at home or in
another church. Therefore, the example of the Israelite people should be
before our eyes, so that we may flee idolatry, since the Lord avenged it
on His people with terrible punishments. This is the first thing that
Hosea has to do with, and the most important sayings that he has
everywhere are to be referred to this.

He calls idolatry an adultery and says that God is offended by
idolatrous worship as a husband is offended by the adultery of his wife.

In the fourth chapter he says \[v. 11.\], \"Fornication, wine and must
make mad.\" For just as those who are in lewd love and those who are
drunk have no sense and are almost mad, so also idolatry makes
nonsensical people, that they cannot be instructed, cannot be set right
by the Word, but blindly rush wherever the spirit of fornication drives
them, as we see in the Papists.

In the ninth chapter he says that idolatry is also punished in this way,
that God sends false teachers. \"The prophets,\" he says \[v. 7.), \"are
fools, and the ruddy spirits are mad, because of your great iniquity and
because of the great hostile idolatry.\" So Paul says \[2 Thess. 2, 10
11.) that GOD sends powerful errorists because they have not believed
the truth.

In the thirteenth chapter, 6r says that idolatry generally comes from
well-being, from good rest and abundance of all things \[v. 6.):
\"Because they have been fed, that they have been satisfied and have
enough, their hearts are lifted up,\" that is, they have rejected the
Word,

and arranged services for themselves according to their liking.

Here are also to be drawn the sayings in which the prophet threatens the
idolaters and despisers of the word with desolation and other
punishments, as it is in the fourth chapter.

In the fourth chapter it is said \[v. 4. according to the Latin\]: \"My
people have perished because they are without the Word\", and soon after
\[v. 14. according to the Latin): \"The people will fall away because
they do not pay attention to the word.\"

And in the ninth chapter \[v. 17\]: \"My God will reject them, because
they will not hear him; and they must go astray among the heathen.\"
These are remarkable sayings, which show that when the word is
neglected, idolatries arise, for the sake of which finally misfortunes
of all kinds break in.

Here belongs what he says in the fourth chapter \[v. 6.\]: \"You reject
God\'s word, therefore I will also reject you, that you shall not be my
priest. Thou forgettest the law of thy God, therefore will I also forget
thy children.\"

This saying is also useful and especially suitable to strengthen hearts
today. The popes and bishops boast of the office they have in the church
and therefore want people to keep what they command. But the judgment
stands firm that those who reject the word are rejected by God, and they
are not to be heard. The highest respect is for the word. The church
obeys it and does not look at the person of the one who teaches it. But
those who do not bring the word, or who do what is contrary to the word,
the church knows that they are rejected by God and does not hear them.

The second teaching is the exhortation to right worship and holy living
or repentance. This is repeated three times. First, in the sixth
chapter, v. 6: \"I delight in love, and not in sacrifice; and in the
knowledge of God, and not in burnt offerings.\" Then in the tenth
chapter, v. 12: \"Sow to yourselves righteousness and reap love, and
plow differently because it is time.\" And in the twelfth 1) chapter, v.
7: \"Turn therefore unto thy

1\) In the Latin editions: nnäömwv.

1398 L. XXIV, SIS-S21. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
2040-2043. 1399

GOD, keep mercy and justice, and always hope in your GOD.\"

For our whole life must be directed to receiving forgiveness of sins by
faith, to eradicating evil and killing sin, and to holding fast the hope
of salvation in the cross. These are the right services in which God is
pleased. But few perform them. The word is neglected, the neighbor is
neglected, and people hang on to sins. Hence, when the wrath and
displeasure of God seize them, they are without hope. This is the power
of sin that leads us away from this rule.

Therefore the prophet adds to the exhortation in the fourteenth 1)
chapter a teaching \[v. 3.\]: \"Take these words with you, and turn to
the Lord, and say unto him, Forgive us all our sins, and do us good; and
we will offer up the farrows of our lips.\" For it is prayer alone that
provides us with what we lack, as can be seen from the parable of the
servant who owed ten thousand pounds, Matt. 18:26 ff.

Those who do this, that is, those who keep righteousness and justice 2)
and hope in God, then add the request that God forgive their sins and
govern them, are children of God through Christ, redeemed from hell and
freed from death. Therefore, even though they die, they rise again,
raised by the Son of God to eternal life. In the meantime, we should
comfort ourselves in the hope of the eternal goods that will then be
given to us, but which are held out to us in words, with the fact that
we are, as he says in the second chapter \[Cap. 1, 10. 2, 1. 19.\],
children of the living God and God\'s people, yes, his bride 2c.

Among these teachings are the glorious and comforting sayings that the
prophet intersperses from the Gospel. In the second chapter he says
\[Cap. 1, 10.\]: \"And it shall come to pass in the place where it was
said unto them: Ye are not my people, it shall be said unto them, O ye
children of the living God!\" Likewise

1\) In the Latin editions: äeeirno ter-tio.

2\) Erlanger: cmstoüiaiU instead of: enstoUiunt.

\[Cap. 2, 1.\], \"Say unto your brethren, they are my people; and unto
your sister, let her be in grace.\" Likewise \[Cap. 2, 19. f.\], \"I
will betroth myself unto thee for ever; I will confide in thee in
righteousness and judgment, in grace and mercy. Yea, in faith will I
betroth myself unto thee; and thou shalt know the: LORD know.\" There is
also added \[v. 21.\] a promise that the prayer shall be heard: \"In
that day, saith the LORD, will I hear; I will hear heaven. \"2c.

But of the prayer of the hypocrites, who reject the doctrine of faith
and rely on their righteousness, he says in the seventh chapter \[v.
14\] that it is an abominable howling, by which the ears of God are
offended. The masses of the papists, their horae canonicae, their
sermons and other services are of this kind today.

And in the fifth chapter he says \[v. 6\]: \"Then they will come with
their flocks and herds to seek the Lord, but will not find him, for he
has turned away from them.\" For he teaches that those who miss the time
of repentance and continue in their sins cannot escape punishment in any
way, since God does not hear them.

Thus he says in the eighth chapter \[v. 13\] that God hates the
sacrifices of the hypocrites: \"Though they sacrifice much, and bring
flesh, and eat it, yet the Lord hath no pleasure in it.\" For this
pleases Him, which He said above in the sixth chapter, v. 6: \"I delight
in love, and not in sacrifice.\"

Now although the church has these glorious gifts, which relies not on
her righteousness but on the mercy of God, yet he says \[Cap. 2, 15.\]
that she is in the valley of Achor, that is, she is afflicted in many
ways, as he therefore compares her to an orphan in the fourteenth
chapter \[v. 4.

In the third chapter there is a glorious prophecy of Christ, and a
testimony that he is the awakened God. For he says thus \[v. 5\],
\"After this the children of Israel shall return, and seek the Lord
their God, and David their king; and shall honor the Lord and his grace
in the latter days.\" For he calls Christ David, as Ezekiel, Cap. 34,
24. Because the same worship David-.

1400 **L. XXIV, pp21-524.** Luther\'s addition to Hosea 13, 14. **W. VI,
2043-2047.** 1404

and attributed to the Lord, it follows that this David is God by nature,
according to the saying \[Isa. 42:8\]: \"I will not give my glory to
another.\"

In the sixth and thirteenth chapters are clear testimonies of the
resurrection of the dead. \[Cap. 6, 1-3. \"The Lord hath torn us
asunder, he also will heal us; he hath smitten us, he also will bind us
up. He maketh us alive after two days; he will raise us up the third
day, that we may live before him. Then we will be careful and diligent
to know the Lord. For he shall break forth as the brightness of the
morning, and shall come upon us as the rain\" 2c. For the resurrection
of Christ, by which he overcame death and destroyed hell, was followed
by the revelation of the gospel over the whole earth, and we also will

called to the hope of the resurrection through Christ.

In the thirteenth chapter is a glorious saying \[v. 14.\], \"I will
deliver them out of hell, and from death. Death, I will be a poison unto
thee; hell, I will be a pestilence unto thee.\" Those who believe this
through Christ fear neither death nor hell, for they know that through
Christ death is slain and hell is destroyed. Therefore, there is nothing
left to do but to unite with Christ, the victor over death and hell; he
does not want to enjoy his victory alone, but distributes the spoil, as
he says in the Gospel \[Luc. 11, 22\], and makes us partakers of this
victory. To this true and eternal God, together with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, be praise and glory forever and ever. Amen.

**Martin Luther\'s addition to the passage of Hosea Cap. 13, 14: Death,
I will be a poison to you 2c.**

This passage \[which in the Vulgate reads\]: Ero mors tua, o mors, ero
morsus tuus, inferne \[Death, I will be your death, Hell, I will be your
bitefs, the apostle Paul reads 1 Cor. 15, 55. thus: \"Death, where is
your sting? Hell, where is thy victory?\" *Που σου, θάνατε, το χέντρον;
που σου, \^οη, το νΐχος;* ; on which it is necessary to speak a little
more widely and carefully, because Paul is thought to speak strange
things and things not pertinent to the matter, and not easily has any
passage been translated so differently as this, Hos. 13, 14.

First of all, it is clear that the difference arose from the Hebrew text
itself. For Jerome, Symmachus, and all our commentators testify
constantly that in their copies they read the word XXX, that is, \"I
will be,\" whereas others, as the Septuagint, the fifth edition, and
Aquila, testify that by transposing the letters (per metathesin) they
read XXX, that is, \"where?\". With these agrees the Apo

Paul, who is certainly a very important authority, and no doubt was very
learned in Hebrew, Yes, there are even now Hebrews who hold that XXX
means \"where?\"and not \"I will be\", since \"I will be\" with full
letters in Hebrew is XXXX, 2 Mos. 3, 12. 2 Sam. 7, 14. 1 Chron. 18,
13., 1) and only by omitting the at the end of the word (per apocopen)
it can be taken for \"I will be\".

Although the reputation of the seventy interpreters is of little value
to me, since they have often, whether it was done willingly or through
ignorance, translated things that are quite far from the words and the
opinion of the holy Scriptures, which cannot be defended by any reason,
as Jerome proves in many passages, - yet he praises Aquila as a sharp
and very exact interpreter, and the

1\) The last two citations are according to the designation and counting
of our German Bible; in the editions: 2 lisA. 7. 1?aral. 17.

1402 L. XXIV. 524-526. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
2047-2050. 1403

fifth edition has had a reputation not to be despised, - so it seems to
me nevertheless, since Paul agrees with them, that one must read
absolutely just like him, and that Hosea wrote \"where?\", and not \"I
will be\".

Then mors tua is not the same word with the one that follows: o mors,
but XXXX, which is a completely different word in Hebrew. For if it be
derived from the word, it signifies: thy pestilence, or thy pestilences
in the plural. And I believe that this is how Paul read it, who
translates, \"Thy sting,\" and I hold that this is the correct reading.
This is also supported by the word that follows: Where is, O hell, XXXX?
which comes from the word that does not have two meanings, or is
ambiguous, but is simple and unambiguous.

For the two words XXX and XXX. are in the Scriptures names of
pestilences, as with the Latins the two words pestis and lues, and as
XXX \[pestilence\] is more frightening than pestis \[plague\], since one
has not yet been able to find a remedy for that disease, which soon
kills, yes, which is rather a poison for nature than a disease, as
Perottus says, so in Hebrew XXX is more frightening than XXX. Therefore
some invent that they are names of evil spirits, about which one can
look up Lyra and Burgensis in the 91st Psalm. Since Hosea connects the
unambiguous with the ambiguous 121 as it were by repetition of the same
thing (per tautologiam), then it is sufficiently evident that he thereby
cancelled the ambiguity and limited the word to one meaning, and that he
did not want to be read but XXX.

St. Paul translates XXX tua, by: \"thy victory\"; the Septuagint: thy
sting, by which Paul rendered tua. Jerome: plaga tua \[thy bite\];
Symmachus: occursus tuus tuu8 \[thy attack, as also the 91st Psalm, v.
6., has in Latin \[the Vulgate\]: Ab incursu \[before the run-up\], that
is, from which the fifth edition and Theodotio: Plaga tua \[your
pestilence\].

If you derive it from the word -on,

1\) So has correctly the Jena edition. Wittenberg and Erlangen: ksbsb.

so 1/7\^/ means your words, your things, your legal matters, in the
plural. So runs Aquila and the fifth edition: Ubi sunt sermones tui?
\[Where are your speeches?\] And the Septuagint: *Που ή δίχη σου;* ;
where is your legal.

Your revenge, your punishment, your right? and the like, of which I will
deal with later. For I consider this reading to be violent and forced.

It seems to me now that without preconceived opinion according to the
Hebrew the words should be translated actually in such a way: Where are
thy pestilences, O death? Where is your pestilence, O hell? But the
prophet does not speak according to the letter of the pestilences or the
accidental things, about which the physicians have to judge and speak;
also not of the accidental death, but of the pestilences and the death,
which are innate to us by nature, which rage and rage through the whole
human race. These pestilences have also a young, healthy, strong,
beautiful man, for all die, and all die by the same pestilences, as the
51st Psalm, v. 7. laments, \"Behold, I am conceived in sins.\" But
before I say more about this, let us first deal with Paul\'s text.

St. Paul cites 1 Cor. 15, 55. two scriptural passages and connects them
with each other. The first is from Isa. 25, 8: \"Death is swallowed up
in victory.\" It is in the day that I also erred with many others in
thinking that this passage of Isaiah was the same as that in Hosea Cap.
13, 14. \[Vulg.\]: \"I will be thy death.\" The second is from this 13th
chapter of Hosea, \"Death, where is thy sting?\"

First, we must speak of the former passage. Here Paul improves the
seventy interpreters, since he says: \"Death is swallowed up in
victory\", where those translated: The mighty reigning death has
swallowed up; and he changes the active expression into the passive. For
the saying of the Septuagint, that death violently devours all things,
is neither here in place, nor worthy of spiritual and prophetic
theology. For who does not know that we owe everything to death,
ourselves and ours, as Horace says?

**2) Erlanger: äi doreeüo.**

1404 **XXIV, 526-528.** Luther\'s addition to Hosea 13, 14. W. VI,
**2650-2053.** 1405

The books of all pagans are full of this matter, and miserable
experience teaches us the same thing constantly in every hour and in
every moment, we may like it or not.

Therefore, rejecting the Septuagint\'s translation, Paul puts forward
the right and spiritual view: it is not necessary to say that the very
powerful death devours all, but that death, the exceedingly powerful
devourer of all, has been devoured. Therefore he translates passively,
\"Death is swallowed up in victory.\" But it is sufficiently known that
where the passive meaning is, at the same time the active is also set,
and vice versa, as it entails the nature of things that stand in
relation to each other (relativorum). They set one another and cancel
one another out; namely, where there is an intertwined thing, there must
also necessarily be something that intertwines. Since St. Paul therefore
wanted to use the passive meaning, namely: death is devoured, he at the
same time indicated that in the text of Isaiah the active meaning must
be understood, not for death, but against death, and that the Septuagint
translated it badly: It devoured the mighty death, in the nominative.
But it should have been translated: He (namely, the Son of GOD) hath
swallowed up death, in the accusative, into victory, or eternally. For
this is how the Hebrew reads: He swallowed up death, or consumed, or
plunged into eternity, or into victory.

\"Into victory,\" which in Hebrew is XXXX, is, I believe, correctly
translated by the apostle. The Hebrews know that the meaning of the word
is as much as 1) to overcome, to have the upper hand, to be victorious,
to be very powerful, to be foremost, to prevail, so that the sense is,
\"Death is swallowed up in victory,\" that is, after death is swallowed
up, life has the upper hand, it rules, reigns, triumphs. For (as grammar
teaches) it indicates the movement toward a place (motum ad locum), or
(as the philosophers speak of their things) the final purpose and why it
happens (finem ultimatum et gratia cujus), so that this victory is not
Christ\'s active (activa) victory, but our suffering (finem ultimatum et
gratia cujus).

1\) Erlanger: \[sss in dog instead of: \[ssv id c\^uod.

the (passive) victory that Christ has brought about for us through his
victory; namely, death has also been swallowed up for us (through the
victor Christ), so that life triumphs eternally, and death also has no
hope whatsoever of ever returning, not even to battle, much less to
victory or dominion, as it has hitherto and still has over us wretched
people.

Thus Paul says Rom. 5:21: \"That as sin reigned unto death, even so
might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus
Christ our Lord.\" And again \[v. 14.\], \"Death reigned from Adam even
unto Moses.\" From this it is seen that Paul took the word, XXX, which
our commentators have explained by eternal, everlasting, but the
Septuagint by mighty reign, for conquer 2) and victory. And what can be
said with greater truth than that he conquers and reigns mightily who,
while his adversary has perished or been devoured, himself remains
intact and glorious forever?

The other passage is this, which we have under hands, and which we have
translated above from the Hebrew: \"Where are thy pestilences, O death?
Where is your pestilence, O hell?\" This Paul renders thus X \"Death,
where is thy sting? Hell, where is your victory?\"

Here it is necessary to know Paul\'s theology of sin in the letter to
the Romans in the fifth, sixth and seventh chapter, because Hosea wants
the same as Paul. Namely, the whole human race was corrupted and ruined
at once by the sin that occurred through the first man, which is called
original sin, 3) and this same sin was increased in the course of time
by the actual sins (actualibus peccatis). At the same time, the
punishments were also increased, because both increase every day.

This sin he calls the pestilences of death and the plague of hell, as he
speaks \[1 Cor. 15:56.\], \"The sting of death is sin,\" from which we,
through Christ the

L\) Erlanger: xrovineers instead of: pro vinoere.

3\) Erlanger: voeat instead of: voeant.

1406 **L. XXIV. 528-s-ro.** Interpretations On the Prophets. **W. VI.
2053-2055.** 1407

Son of God, are liberated and redeemed. For without sin there would be
no death, as it is said in Genesis 2:17: \"Whichever day thou eatest
thereof, thou shalt surely die of death,\" that is, without sin thou
wouldst live forever. But the nature corrupted by these pestilences and
plagues, that is, by sin, is subject to death, and, as Paul says, Rom.
5:12, \"so death has come to all men, because they have all sinned\".
Thus death reigns and triumphs by its pestilences, and hell by its
pestilence, for sin is the power, dominion, force, yea, the juice, the
poison, the contagion of death, and not in one kind only, but many
pestilences.

Furthermore, these pestilences and this plague or sin usually behave
quietly, as if they were resting and sleeping, but \"at the door\", as
it says in Genesis 4:7, that is, sin is neither felt nor respected, as
we see in the safe men and the Epicureans, although in this way all
perish and die by it, even though in ignorance. Rom. 5, 1) 13. f.:
\"Where there is no law, sin is not respected. Because death reigned
from Adam until Moses, even over those who did not sin\" 2c. And Rom. 7,
8. f.: \"Without the law sin was dead, but when the commandment came,
sin became alive again.\"

This is not what is being discussed here, but the sin that has been
awakened, that is, recognized, by the Law. This shows that it is the
pestilence of death and the plague of hell, because either it is only
more aroused and rages, hating the law that forbids, as one says:
Nitimur in vetitum etc. \[We chase after what is forbidden 2c.\]. \[We
pursue what is forbidden 2c.\], 2) or leads to despair and blasphemy,
through the sensation of divine wrath. Thus sin becomes exceedingly
sinful, excites in us all kinds of lust, and kills by the commandment,
Rom. 7, 13. 8. 11.

The Holy Spirit aims at these two forms of sin through the two words
\"death\" and \"hell\". The excited sin knows that it is doing what is
worthy of death, and it knows that it is doing what is worthy of death.

1\) In the Latin editions erroneously: Rom. 4.

2\) Cf. Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. VII, 1233.

that it goes through despair into hell. And as death kills the body, so
hell snatches away the soul. Therefore, in the Scriptures these two oers
are distinguished in such a way that

the grave, to the body, hell, to the soul. Ps. 6, 6.: \"In death thou
art not remembered; who shall give thee thanks in hell?\" Ps. 115, 17:
\"The dead will not praise you, Lord, nor those who descend into
silence.\"

Jerome says in this passage: \"Between death and hell there is this
difference: death is the separation of the soul from the body; hell is
the place where souls are kept, either for refreshment or punishment,
according to merit. He says this for the sake of the patriarchs, who
confess that they are going down to hell. But how this place is, and
what or how the souls are, act, behave in it, we do not know, because
the Scripture does not say. It is admittedly held that after the
resurrection of Christ there is no hell for the godly, although impudent
men have invented purgatory instead of it. But those who understand what
sin is, which is aroused by the law and causes despair, also understand
what death and hell are. But it is surprising that instead of \"your
pestilences\" Paul translates: \"your sting\" and instead of \"your
pestilence\": \"your victory\". Did he perhaps also want to deviate from
the Septuagint, or rather from those who take the pestilences and the
pestilence in passive meaning? as those do who read: I will be thy
pestilences, O death; I will be thy pestilences, O hell; namely, those
which death and hell suffer from Christ the Son of God. And perhaps he
wanted to avoid an ambiguity. For even if one reads, \"Death, where are
thy pestilences?\" it is doubtful with us whether it is the pestilence
by which death is killed, or the pestilence which kills us.

But he undoubtedly speaks with Hosea of the active pestilence of death,
with which he kills us, just as, on the other hand, he speaks of our
suffering resurrection, by which we are raised, not of the active per-

1408 **XLIV. 530-\^532. Luther\'s addition to Hosea 13, 14. W. VI.
2055-2058.** 4409

The personal resurrection of Christ, which brings about our
resurrection, as the words of Paul say most clearly \[1 Cor. 15, 54.
f.\]: \"But when this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and
mortality shall put on immortality, then shall be fulfilled the word
that is written, Death, where is thy sting? although our resurrection by
necessary implication includes the resurrection of Christ, and again, as
the nature of those things which are related to each other entails, and
is preached quite clearly by the preceding word: \"I will deliver them
out of hell, and save them from death.\"

Perhaps he wanted to speak of such a great matter in a more frightening
way, and to magnify the word of Hosea: \"Thy pestilences\", as a common
word among the common people, by a word taken from the war camp and
warfare or rather from robbers, namely \"sting\", by which death did not
pierce and cut off the whole human race at once with a slow pestilence,
but with whole force for eternity. For here one must pay attention to
the emphasis in the \"sting of death\". For if only sting or point were
said, it would be of little importance, since also the little bees and
smaller worms have a point or sting.

But if you add \"of death\", \'then the top of the sting is greater than
the whole world, and completely as great as death itself is, namely the
lord and tyrant of the whole human race from the beginning of the world
to the end. So it is when you say \"the Word\" alone; then one thinks of
something small, namely the speech of a man, but when you add
\"God\'s\", then the Word is greater than all creatures, even than death
and hell.

I would also like to say that Paul looked at the spear of Goliath \[1
Sam. 17, 7\], which was a picture of death. Perhaps the Hebrews did the
same before the Septuagint. For I hardly think that the seventy
interpreters first invented their interpretation of this passage. Now
however that may be, if you call death and its kingdom, you have given
the very greatest

If you call it a fever, a motherwort, a weevil, a little needle of
death, you will not be called a man. For death has devoured the whole
human race. Hence also Paul alone translates \[the plague) of hell by:
\"the victory,\" as it were an eternal devouring, where the Septuagint
have put stingers, as I said above. For hell devours by its 2\^\], that
is, by sin, it reigns and triumphs over the whole human race, as if it
should never be saved.

Here again you see that Paul is pleased with this meaning of nn, that it
is taken as \"victory\", which is otherwise translated by \"to the
end\", \"forever\", because he who is victorious and has the upper hand
remains when his adversary perishes, as Ps. 9:7 (Vulg.): \"The swords of
the enemy are fallen to the end,\" that is, to victory; and Ps. 10:11
(Vulg.): \"He hath hid his face, that he should not see to the end,\"
that is, victory. 1) Thus death devours through all men to the end, that
is, in victory, because, since all die, he continues and triumphs.

This is truly a beautiful person poetry, in which death and hell are
presented as enemies of human nature, terrible by their weapons, by the
sting, XXX, XXX, victor, Trium

phators who mock us forever by their victory, that is, the sin and
sickness of our nature, which the Son of God by Himself threw down for
us, as David did Goliath, and lifted up for eternity and victory.

Now it is easy, if one feels like it, to reconcile the interpretations
of the others as: Death, where are thy speeches? the speeches, the
words, the things of death, with which he handles, are the very sin and
handwriting, which came into being by statutes, as Paul says Col. 2, 14.
whereby he convicts, accuses, and condemns us of our guilt. For what
else can death say, claim, boast against us than this word: You have
sinned; by your sin you are

1\) Compare Luther\'s interpretation of these Psalm passages in the St.
Louis edition, Vol. IV, 694 and 779.

1410 L. xxiv, 532 f. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, svs8-A \"i.
1411

guilty of me, by the right of sin I devour you eternally? Death does not
speak or act with any other creature than with man, because he alone has
sinned. No animal sins. But he speaks against us nothing but judgment
and conducts his case, or as the Septuagint translates it.

The same can be done with bite, run, attack, and how others may have
translated it differently. For since all agree that they speak of death
and hell and the kingdom thereof, but Paul clearly says that sin is the
means or instrument with which death and hell operate, by which they
devour, reign, and do everything against the human race, sin itself can
be called the stumbling block without danger, triumph, and do all things
against the human race, sin itself may without danger be called the
sting, the spear, the bite, the pestilence, the pestilence, the poison,
the wound, the running, the victory of death and hell, and all that by
which man can be killed and damned. Only one must nevertheless take care
that the Hebrew text of Hosea retains one, and indeed a certain,
grammatical meaning of the words, which Paul and others may have put
into images in various ways without impairing the sense. For even Paul
does not care whether one says sting or pestilence 2c., if one only
understands that this sting, pestilence 2c. is nothing other than sin.
But this is enough of this.

Now let us go through the whole sermon of Hosea at the end of the
thirteenth chapter \[v. 12. ff.\]: \"The iniquity of Ephraim is bound
together.\" I believe that it is known to all that the prophets, but
especially Hosea, have given briefly summarized discourses and, as it
were, the themes, or rather the summaries, of their sermons. Thus Hosea,
since in this sermon he undoubtedly gave a very detailed speech about
the law, about sin, about the grace of the future Christ and his
kingdom, finally summarized and concluded everything in a summa and very
short main pieces, saying:

1\) Erlanger: opinnri, Wittenberger and Jenaer: äawnari. We have
followed the latter reading.

The iniquity of Ephraim is bound together,\" as if to say, \"We have
often spoken much of the law, but the more we teach, the more we sin. We
do not judge anything by the teaching of the law; only it is so
necessary to teach the law, that the people may know that they are lost
sinners, convicted by the law, and that they need another teaching,
which goes beyond the law, namely, of the forgiveness of sins, and of
the Holy Spirit, who is to be given through the promised and future
Messiah, namely, to another and eternal life. Therefore he says:

Cap. 13, 12. The **iniquity of Ephraim is bound together, and their sin
is kept.**

I know that Job 14:17 says: \"You have sealed my transgression in a
bundle\", which he wanted to be understood as the sin that was kept and
should be punished. But since in this place it is added: \"Their sin is
kept\" (absconditum-covered), I follow this opinion, that Hosea
prophesies of the new testament, that is, of the forgiveness of sins, as
Daniel \[Cap. S, 24.\] says, that the sin is sealed. And Ps. 32:1:
\"Blessed is he whose transgressions are forgiven, whose sin is
covered.\"

For the sins to be covered is, as the 51st Psalm, v. 11, says, that the
face is turned away from the sins. And Jer. 31, 2) 34. and Isa. 43, 25.:
\"to remember sins no more\". For W\'. 130, 3. Vulg.): \"If thou, O
Lord, wilt take heed of sin (which is done by the law bringing it to
light, instructing about it, accusing and condemning it), O Lord, who
shall stand?\" So also Job 14:16 \[Vulg.\] says: \"Now thou hast
numbered my steps, but spare my sins,\" which in Hebrew is expressed
thus: Take not heed to my sin.

Therefore Hosea wants this: The acceptable time and day of salvation
will come, when the law will be finished or fulfilled by Christ, the
iniquity of Ephraim will be closed up and bound together, forgiven.

2\) In the issues: asr. 33.

1412 **2. XXIV, 533-535.** Luther\'s addition to Hosea 13, 14. **W. VI,
20VI-2V64.** 1443

and the sin will be covered and buried, as it were, which is revealed,
made public and spread out through the law. Then, however, it will be
gathered together and, as it were, be confined in a bundle, so that it
will no longer stand open before the eyes of God, and not made known to
the outside world, still accuse and show its power.

**V. 13: For they shall be afflicted like a woman in childbirth.**

This is understood of a wholesome childbearing and pain, of which Isa.
26, 16. is said: \"Lord, when there is affliction, one seeks you.\" And
soon after \[v. 17 f.\]: \"As a woman with child, when she is about to
give birth, is afraid and cries out in her pain: so it is with us, O
Lord, before thy face. Then we also are with child, and are afraid, and
scarce draw breath.\" Jer. 31, 19: \"When I was converted, I repented;
for after I was wrought, I smote myself on the hip,\" 2c., for this is
the manner of women in childbearing, as Jeremiah says \[Cap. 30, 6\].
And Micah 4:10: \"Dear one, suffer such pain, and caw, O daughter of
Zion, as one in childish distress. For thou must indeed go out of the
city, and dwell in the field.\"

For the forgiveness of sins and grace work the killing of the flesh, the
hatred of self, and the destruction of sin in the flesh. Then it arouses
persecution, as is known by the example of the whole church. These are
the salutary birth pains. It is hard to the flesh, especially to
Ephraim, that the glory 1\>of the law should be killed, and that it
should kill the righteousness of works in itself. This is in truth
killing the old man and stripping him with his works \[Col. 3, 9.\], not
only with the gross and manifest sins, but with the apparent and most
holy services, in which they trusted and were sure and certain of glory
before God.

**Because they are careless children (Ipse filius non sapiens).**

That is, now the servant has become a son, and a new man from the old.
He sees and considers that he is foolish and

Now he understands that another word, namely the gospel, is necessary,
by which he is instructed that he should boast of the Lord, and that
what he formerly considered gain, he now regards as harm, and he
recognizes that he must become a fool in order to become wise. This was
the hardest thing for this people, and most of them rejected this
foolishness of the cross and remained in the life and glory of their own
righteousness and wisdom. But this recognized foolishness is blessed and
salutary.

**The time will come when they will not remain before the wailing of the
children.**

Under the law, there was a time when they were constantly in need of
children and never gave birth; they were inferior to the law, but they
did not achieve the righteousness of the law. For the law brought
nothing to perfection, but only showed justice, but did not provide it.
This is how it goes in the law, that one always learns and never comes
to the knowledge of the truth, because \"the children have come to
birth, and there is no strength to give birth\", that I use the words of
Hezekiah \[Is. 37, 3. So there was nothing but mourning and suffocation
of the children, because no flesh is justified by the works of the law.

But at the time of grace, Ephraim is no longer in the misery of
children, because all are born of God, through the most blessed birth,
because the mother herself has powers. Thus it is said in the 110th
Psalm, v. 3: \"Thy children shall be born unto thee as the dew out of
the morning glow.\" And Isa. 54, 1.: \"Boast, you barren, you who do not
give birth; rejoice with glory and exult, you who are not pregnant. For
the lone woman hath more children, neither she that hath the man.\" Thus
Zion stands not in the lamentation of children, but in the joy of many
children. Isaiah speaks abundantly about this in many places.

1\) In the Erlangen edition, there is the note here: \"In rnLNA. eoll.
len: Lsulae 37. (them! )\". - Everything is in order. What is the
Erlangen edition wondering about? Probably it has taken L\^eekias not
for Hezekiah but for Ezekiel, but, as it is wont to do, it has not
looked up the biblical passage.

1414 L. xxiv, W f. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2064-2M8.
1415

**V. 14. But I will deliver them from hell and save them from death.**

These are words in the person of the incarnate Son of God and Savior,
who is the end of the law; he who believes in Him is righteous \[Rom.
10:4\]. For the law provokes wrath and leads to hell, but not out again;
it kills, but does not make alive again. This is very well known from
the Gospel. For he redeemed us not with silver and gold, but with his
own body and with his own precious blood \[1 Pet 1:18 ff\].

**Death, where is your sting? Hell, where is your victory?**

Enough has been said about this above. But the other conception: Death,
I want to be your death, hell, I want to be your pestilence, pleases me
very much and rightly, and is at the same time quite true and
exceedingly lovely, yes, according to the nature of things that refer to
each other (ex natura relativorum) it follows from the former. But in
this place I have wanted to explain Paulum, 1 Cor. 15, 55. according to
grammar, therefore I have had to refer that view to another place. This
I wanted to add here, the rest is in the interpretation.

**F. D. Martin Luther\'s interpretation of the prophet Joel.**

1\. Luther\'s lectures on the prophet Joel,

according to the Altenburg manuscript.\*)

**Held in July; finished August 9, 1524. Printed in Dietrich\'s first
edition in 1536; after the Altenburg manuscript in 1884.** Newly
translated from Latin.

**Preface on Joel.**

All prophets have the same opinion, because this is their only aim, that
they aim at the future Christ or at the future kingdom of Christ. All
their prophecies aim at this and need not be related to anything else.
Although they include various histories of either present or future
things, all of them serve to make known the future kingdom of Christ.
Therefore, the prophets, whether they speak of misfortune or of
prosperity, have always

The prophets who have denounced the Kingdom of God, wanted the Kingdom
of Christ to be in view. This can also be seen in the prophet Joel, who
first speaks **of** an exceedingly harmful destruction that came upon
the Jewish people, which he used to frighten the Jews and to call them
to repentance in their fright, so that they would expect the future
Christ (of whose kingdom he will speak later in many words). Therefore,
from the first chapter of this pro-

\*) As we have already said in the first note to the previous writing,
it can be assumed that Luther had read only once about the minor
prophets, and that all existing relations, as different as they are, can
be traced back to the same lectures in the years 1524 to 1526. The
interpretation of the three prophets Joel, Amos and Obadiah is, however,
only in 1566 in print published at Strasbourg in Octav under the title:
Lnarratio D. Martini I\^utiwri in trss propdstas, loüslsin, Xrnos, 6t
Xdäiam. Anne prirnurn in In66in aeüita. Xooessit aeüitioni Uuio Inäex
ioonpletissimus. Xr\^ntorati, Ximo M.V.XXXVl. At the end: Xr\^ontorati
apuä lokan. XU)6rturn, Ximo, M.V.XXXVI. In the preface, the printer
Johann Albert says that he has a copy of Luther\'s lectures on all the
prophets except Hosea and Daniel t Instead of Daniel. it should probably
have been called Malachi sWeim. Ausg., Bd. XIH, p. XIP because we are
dealing here only with the minor prophets, and of the major ones Luther
interpreted only Isaiah and part of Daniel).

1416 **L. XXV, 52.** interpretation of Joel (1.), preface. **W. VI,
2068.** 1417

pheien das meine Meinung, 1) dass er im ersten Kapititel nicht weissagt,
sondern, wie ich gesagt habe, einfach die gegenwärtige Historie erzählen
von jenem Verderben und von der Vernichtung

1\) From here to the end of the paragraph Dietrich has instead of the
following in the text: .that he predicts the future defeat which the
people would receive from the Assyrians. But he calls the Assyrians in
figurative speech \"caterpillars, locusts, beetles and vermin\", because
the Assyrians plucked the Jews little by little and curtailed their
power, until they finally led away the whole people captive. But
Sanherib suffered a great defeat in the siege of Jerusalem. He
commemorates this in the second chapter below.

of the seeds and all the fruits of the land that he had seen.

In the second chapter, however, he seems to begin the prophecy, which
deals with another kind of locusts, namely with the Babylonians. So this
is the summary of the first chapter and the prophet does not deal with
anything else in it than that he frightens the people of the Jews by
that destruction that the Lord had sent before their eyes, so that they,
thus frightened, might repent and recognize themselves.

The author is of the opinion that he has a very good knowledge of the
subject, which a certain scholar (stuckioso) has picked up with the
utmost diligence. For the editing of these notes, he called in a careful
and godly scholar who had studied in Wittenberg for many years, so that
he could survey everything with good judgment and bring the
interpretation into harmony with the German translation \[of the Bibles.
This editor was Veit Dietrich, who had become a preacher in Nuremberg
around New Year\'s Day 1536 (cf. De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 664) after almost
fourteen years in Wittenberg. To Justus Menius, who had asked him to
publish the remaining prophets as well, he wrote on October 30, 1538
(Kolde, analseta I\^rrtksrarra, p. 331) that Luther had not approved of
his earlier work on the three prophets, as people in Luther\'s immediate
surroundings (cmi eum so duditant) had reported to him. Now here the
question comes to us: Should we now, as happened in the old editions
(also in the \"Walchs\"), leave in our edition writings that Luther did
not approve of? Luther had good reason to disapprove, because Dietrich,
as the Weimar edition says and also proves, \"often suppressed Luther\'s
opinion, even turned it into the opposite\". This question requires us
to look back to the sources. These are presented to us in the Weimar
edition, and in part also in the Erlangen edition. \"In the Gymnasium
library at Altenburg (says the Weimar edition) a manuscript in quarto is
preserved, on the 50 pages of which are Luther\'s lectures on the ten
prophets Joel to Zechaxiah. Linke has not exactly discovered it, but has
published it for the first time in the Erl. Edition op. exsZst.
XXV-XXVIII. The codex is written by one hand so carefully that a
transcription in the college cannot be thought of. In time, this
manuscript came into the hands of Spalatin, whose hand made short
summaries in the margins, above and below the lines, once in the text
also corrigirte a German word.\" We briefly summarize here the results
of the detailed study of the Weimar edition on this manuscript. The
scribe, or rather Conzrpient (for even as he was writing he was still
crossing out and changing and not anxiously adhering to his original),
compiled the Commentaries on the Ten Prophets for a man (namely
Spalatin) who had requested it. According to the whole way in which he
dealt with his model, one could assume Dietrich to be the scribe, but
the writing does not allow this. The interpretations on the prophets
Nahum and Zephaniah in the Latin Wittenberg edition, torn. IV, col. 613
and 647, agree verbatim with the Altenburg manuscript (except for a few
passages that offer a handhold for criticism). However, the
Wittenbergers did not have this manuscript in front of them, which is
evident from the fact that the additions found in it have not been
included, even those that appear in the continuous text. From this it
can be concluded that both go back to a common original. This original
will be the one that came into the hands of the printer of our
manuscript, Johann Albert. Of course this original also came into Veit
Dietrich\'s hands, since it had to be left to him by the printer for the
purpose of the publication of the three prophets Joel, Amos and Obadiah
in the year 1536. He must have taken a copy of it, which he expanded for
the edition just mentioned. This expansion was necessary preliminary
work. During the publication itself, he then reworked this expanded
copy. Where he thought he had no reason to do so, the text of the 1536
edition is identical word for word with the Altenburg manuscript. From
Dietrich\'s copy (which had not yet been reworked for printing) flowed
the Altenburg manuscript. It contains minor deviations from the
original, mostly only stylistic changes, addition of some marginalia and
additions from other sources. Since the matter is now so, so we will in
our present writing and also in the two following prophets the text of
the Altenburger manuscript as the more original basis, but the
deviations of the Dietrichsche edition in the notes refer, as the
Erlanger and also the Weimarsche edition have already done) Likewise we
will proceed with the prophets Nahum and Zephaniah; the few deviations
of the Wittenberg edition will be indicated in notes. The Altenburg
manuscript is first published by v. Linke in the Erlanger Ausgabe,
exe.\]. opp., tom. XXV-XXVIII, and then also printed with many
improvements in the Weimar edition, vol. XIII. Our writing is found in
the Erlanger Ausgabe, exe\^- ovv., tom. XX V, p 51 and in the Weimar
one, vol. XIII, 88. Dietrich\'s adaptation is found in the Latin Jena
edition (1603), tcnn. Ill, lol. 478d; it is not included in dre
Wittenberger. The German translation is found in the Leipzig edition,
Vol. Vlll, p. 156 and in Walch, Vol. VI, 2066. Our translation is based
on the Weimar edition, from which we have also taken the chronology.
Minor deviations, which have an influence on the Winn kern, will not be
added to the notes. At the end of our writing is noted in the Altenburg
manuscript: IVittkrndsrZa\" in prokssto I\^arrrsiitii s9. Augusts
H)XXIIII.

1418 L. xxv,ss-56. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2ms-sv72.
1419

But since this is the way of the world, that it despises and scorns the
word of God, for we see that this has always happened and still happens
today, there is therefore no doubt that the same thing happened to Joel.
The world never leaves its kind. Its prince is Satan, through whom it is
led as its driver to all evil. For it is the kingdom of darkness, which
cannot help but hate the light (Joh. 1, 5. \[3, 19. f.). And so it
despises the proclaimers of the Word of God, persecutes them, calls them
fools and finally even kills them as unworthy people. For Paul calls the
Christians a sweep offering of the world \[1 Cor. 4, 13.). Here we have
nothing better to hope for.

It is not known exactly at what time Joel prophesied, for he is silent
both

of the time relations as well as of the kings, which other prophets tend
to send ahead of their prophecy. To me he seems to be an old prophet, to
the extent that I believe he prophesied before Isaiah, Hosea and the
other prophets, namely at the time when the kingdom of the Jews was
still in bloom and in the highest peace, and that he saw then this
destruction of which he speaks here. By the way, the order of the
prophets, even that of the other books of the Scriptures, which Jerome
and others have approved, is useless. They are completely in error,
since they think that the prophets followed each other as they are
ordered. Some think that he prophesied under Hosea, but this does not
seem likely to me.

**The first chapter.**

**V. 2. Hear this, you elders.**

The sermon contained in this chapter was not only preached in one place,
but often in many places, for he addresses all the inhabitants of the
land.

**V. 3. Tell your children about it (super hoc).**

Super hoc \[of this) is a frequent Hebrew idiom in Scripture, which the
author of the epistle to the Hebrews also made use of, since he says: ad
angelos autem dicit etc., that is, \"Of the angels he speaks\" \[Heb.
1:7, 1. Thus here super hoc ober ad hoc is as much as \"of this,\" which
the Greeks are wont to express by the preposition.

**V. 4. What the Raapen leave.**

He simply tells the story of the destruction he saw, by which all crops,
seeds, apple trees, grapevines were destroyed; certainly an extremely
harmful plague, which at the same time brings famine, and pestilence.

For the rest, 1) I do not know, nor do I dare to assert anything
certain, what kind of beasts he is thinking of here, by which everything
is eaten away and corrupted. Because the Hebrew interpreters bring
forward so many different opinions that one can take nothing certain
from it.

But about \"the caterpillar\" there is a certainty, because in relation
to this word they agree. The Hebrew word XXX is called in Latin eruca,
in German \"eine Raupe\". But what follows, \"locust\", is the Hebrew
word, but this they translate quite vacillatingly, sometimes by bruchus,
sometimes by locusta. These animals are unknown to us, because our
country does not know them. I would like to translate locusta
\[\"beetle\"\] by \"the large caterpillars\", but I would not dare. It
is certain that we have neither locustas nor bruchum, unless we wanted
to understand it, as I said, of the large caterpillars.

1\) Instead of knlrn in the Erlanger and in the Weimarschen, we have
adopted Midi with the Jena edition.

[1420 **L. XXV, S6-4\".** Interpretation of Joel (1.), Cap. 1, 4-6. W.
**VI. 2072-2074.** 1\^21]{.underline}

**The harness (Rubigo).**

Rubigo is what we use to call in German \"the fire or the flour dew\".
But here it is not the same, but the prophet indicates the name of a
beast, about whose name the Hebrew grammarians also quite
extraordinarily argue, so that we can determine nothing certain about
it. 1) But it is certain that there are four kinds of beasts of various
shapes which have gnawed and spoiled the seeds, all the fruits of the
trees and the vines.

V. 5. **Wake up, you drunkards, and weep.**

This is what I said above, that the prophet is inciting to repentance by
this story of the devastated seeds and fruits. But when he says: \"Wake
up, you drunkards\", he does not say that they are already drunk, nor
does he punish them because of their present drunkenness, but he wants
to say this: Wake up, you who are used to living deliciously and
gloriously, who are used to having everything in abundance, so that you
become drunk with this abundance: wake up now, weep, howl, repent, look
at the work of God and be terrified, consider what will come over you.

**\[Hay, all wine drinkers, for the must.)**

Instead of: Qui bibitis vinum in dulcedine \[in the Vulgate) it should
more correctly read thus: You who like to drink the must when it is
still yeu and sweet, as if he wanted to say: O you who are accustomed to
this splendid way of life, mourn, you will lack, you will suffer hunger
And lack, since you see everything devastated, \"the wine is taken away
from before your mouth\".

) Instead of the \"m in this paragraph following Dietrich brings: And
nevertheless, because with uncertain things free expressions of opinion
are formed, so my opinion is that rudiKoHln means, \"the flour dew\",
which falls down with the dew, and, by hanging at the leaves, if the sun
shines on it, is animated and lives, as we see, so that \^7\'YN is put
in general for the worms, which arise everywhere in such a way and find
in heaps, \"a litter\". Further, this is all spoken figuratively. For he
indicates that the people will soon be plagued by these, soon by those
enemies, the Syrians, Asfyrians, Babylonians, Egyptians 2c., so that
this prophecy is, as it were, a riddle. Now he adds the interpretation,
who these worms are.

V. 6: **For a mighty nation is coming up to my land.**

Instead of ascendet, ascendit \[it is pulled up\] must be read in the
perfect tense. 2) Here Joel seems to speak poetically, as also Virgil in
the fourth book of the Georgica. \[v. 21 sqq.\], in that he ascribes to
the bees an extraordinary perspicacity, fictionalizes that they follow
the leaders, fictionalizes that others keep watch 2c.: so he
fictionalizes here that those beasts of which he has spoken, as it were
in armed hosts, in some way go up, as if he wanted to say: These beasts
will cause such great misfortune as hardly a mighty king could have
caused. Hence the opinion: the caterpillars, the grasshoppers, the
beetles, the creatures come as it were with an army of war. Since the
teachers have not accepted this simple opinion, I do not know what
foolish things they have, according to their usual way, dissuaded from
coming peoples. Jerome agonizes extraordinarily, but in vain.

**That has teeth like lions.**

Because the Hebrew language is very wordy, it often repeats the same
thing, which can be seen especially here, if nowhere else. It is most
necessary that those who read the holy scriptures know this. So here is
a repetition of the previous sentence about the power and quantity of
those innumerable animals, 3) as if he wanted to say: Their number is so
great that they cannot be comprehended, and they cause such great
misfortune that even lions, however fierce they may be, could hardly
have caused such great misfortune.

2\) Instead of the following in this paragraph Dietrich has: And here he
interprets which are the caterpillars and the harmful animals that
devour the vineyards and the seeds, namely \"mighty\" enemies that God
will raise against this people. I approve the opinion of the Jews, who
\"think\" that the prophet spoke figuratively of the Juicetes as an
armed army of enemies.

3\) Instead of: \"Thiere\" Dietrich has: Feinde. - The reading of the
AltenburgerHandschrift: kisxotsntia otrnuitituchnk lrkstjarurü
anirnaliuna iUvrura will be hardly correct. We have assumed: dsstiarnrn
innurn\^\"lMum illarulu, supported from the inLunwralMis in the Vulgate.

[1422 L. XXV, S8-60. Interpretations On the Prophets. W. vr, 2074-207.\"
1423]{.underline}

**V. 7: The same devastates my vineyard.**

Here the prophet takes and assumes the person of every Israelite, 1) who
complains about this ruin and the destruction of the fruits and his
vineyard. Therefore, this passage also serves as proof that the prophet
called these beasts \"nations without number. For the Assyrians (for
these are taken as \"the mighty people and without number\") or also any
other enemies would not only destroy the vines or the fields, but also
the cities and their inhabitants, of which no mention is made here, but
he only says that the vineyards and the fruits are eaten up, which he
attributes to those animals.

**And touches my fig tree.**

This is badly translated \[in the Vulgate: Et ficum meum
decorticavit\]\.... So the Hebrew says: my fig tree to something broken
(in confractionem). Therefore I take the vineyard and the fig tree
simply for 2) the natural vineyard and fig tree, which are devastated
and eaten away by these animals, not for a people, as some interpret it.

**Shear him and discard him.**

This is a mere repetition of the same opinion. For this is the way of
the Hebrew language, that it makes many words, \"shew him,\" namely, of
fruits and leaves, as also Virgil 3) in the same way attributes to
winter that it robs the forest of its ornaments.

**That its branches stand there white.**

\"White\", that is, bare, without leaves.

1\) Here Dietrich continues like this until the end of this paragraph:
who complains about this defeat of the people. He calls the \"vineyard\"
and the \"fig tree\" the people itself, which was ordered and adorned
with the divine law, provided with ceremonies, courts and the kingdom of
God, which they nevertheless misused everything against God Himself for
their well-being.

2\) Here Dietrich lets follow: \"the people\", what then follows in the
text is omitted; contrary to what Luther wants- . :

Z\) Virgil\" OsorAioa, lib. II, v. 404.

**V. 8. hay, like a virgin.**

He leads a parable by which he makes the matter great. As if he wanted
to say: Just as when a virgin who loves her bridegroom in the extreme
weeps and mourns most bitterly when her bridegroom, whom she had loved
so much, has died (for the love between bride 4) and bridegroom is the
most fierce), so you also lament and mourn. And so he calls her to
repentance, as if to say: You 5) make the greatest lamentation of all,
that there can be none greater. By the way, instead of what we read (in
the Vulgate): pubertatis suae should be read more correctly: juventutis
suae (the man of her youth).

**V. 9 For the grain offering and the drink offering are from the house
of the LORD.**

He makes the lamentation and the misfortune great, as if to say: 6) this
plague will not only cause the destruction of the fruits, the trees and
the vineyards, but also the drink offerings will fall. This glory of
yours, by which you are famous before all the peoples of the earth, this
worship, which is ordered by God\'s word, will suffer damage; the
priests will not be able to offer grain offerings or drink offerings,
since the fruits are so destroyed. For the firstfruits and the tithes of
all fruits they gave to the Lord according to the commandment of the law
Deut. 26, 2. ff. But the grain offering was that in which solid things
were offered, as wheat, flour 2c. The drink offerings were given of
liquid things, as of oil, wine 2c.

**V. 10. The field is desolate.**

According to the Hebrew it is to be read thus (instead of: \[Depopulata
est regio\]): The field is devastated, it mourns the country, because
the grain is desolate, the must stands ashamed, the oil miserable. He
gives the cause why the grain offering and drink offering will perish
like this, and

4\) Weimarsche: sponsn instead of: sponsas; a printing error.

5\) In our original: kae tibi; in the Jena one (Die-trich): tue turn;
the Weimar one noted Lroturn.

6\) Instead of the following in this sentence Dietrich has: by this
plague also the food and drink \' sacrifices will fall away. :

1424 **L. XXV. 60-63.** interpretation of Joel (1.), Cap. 1, 10-17. **W.
VI, 2076-2078.** 1425

says: because the field is desolate, all fruits have perished, the Weilt
is gone 2c. But we see in this text clear poetic images. For the poets
say that the meadows and the seeds are laughing, that is, thriving.
Here, however, he says that the earth mourns, the wine stands ashamed
2c.

**Confusum est mustum \[The must stands ashamed\].**

This is a new way of speaking in this prophet, because he often speaks
like this. In German we imitate this way of speaking by saying: \"Der
Wein stehet schändlich. Solomon also often used this word in Proverbs,
speaking of a shameful child, a shameful woman.

**The oil stands miserably (Languit oleum).**

\"The Oelsbaum) is dull\", that is, it does not bear fruit.

**V. 11. The peasants look miserable. 1)**

It jams me of their.

**Around the wheat and barley.**

Instead of: Super frumento, vino et hordeo it reads) according to the
Hebrew: \"About the wheat and about the barley.\" Because in Hebrew the
word \"wine\" is not written. That is, the husbandmen see that there
will be no harvest. After all the fruits have been cut down, they see
that there is nothing left but mourning and pain.

**V. 12: The vine also stands miserable.**

Instead of: Vinea \[the vineyard) confusa \[st sin the Vulgate) it
should more properly read, \"Der Weinstock stehet jämmerlich.\" This is
the same repetition of the present ruin.

**Joy has become sorrow (Confusum est gaudium).**

You see that this is a way of speaking peculiar to the prophet, that he
speaks of being put to shame (de confusione). \"The joy\", that is, that
which they should have rejoiced over, has all perished and been
consumed.

1\) In both the Erlangen and the Weimar editions, these words are not
highlighted as keywords, but are added to the preceding ones without a
new verse number together with their interpretation.

**V. 13. Gird yourselves.**

This is another repetition of the same calamity, that he might provoke
them to repentance. But instead of what we read \[in the Vulgate\]:
Quoniam interiit de domo Dei \[\"for it is gone from the house of your
GOD\"\] the Hebrew reads: For it is prevented (prohibitum) 2c.

V. 14. **Sanctify a fast.**

This is a Hebrew idiom that occurs frequently in Scripture.

V. 15: **For the day of the Lord is near.**

Here he seems to touch upon the prophecy of which we shall see in the
second chapter and in the following. As if he wanted to say: You see the
present evil, the terrible misfortune, which undoubtedly indicates that
other misfortunes will come upon you. \"The day of the Lord\", namely
another day, on which the Lord will visit, as Peter \[1. Ep. 2, 12.\]
also calls it the day on which it will be visited, or \"when it will
come to the day\" (visitationis == the visitation).

**And comes like a ruin from the Almighty.**

That is, there will be such a day, which, when it comes, will bring
devastation that you will not be able to prevent. Therefore, repent.

V. 16 \[Vulg.\] **Has not the food been taken away before your eyes?**

Again he holds the present misfortune against them, so that they would
not forget the future visitation. 2) As if he wanted to say: I mean, he
will visit you. Therefore repent.

V. 17. **The seed is rotten under the earth** (Computruerunt jumenta
\[in stercore suo\]).

Here the interpreters diverge extraordinarily far. But the Hebrew reads
thus: The seed is rotten in its soil, the granaries are destroyed 2c.
This is not something that they \[in the Vulgate\] have been fooling
with from the draught cattle. 3)

2\) Dietrich has instead of the following: But it is the opinion: we are
devastated and miserably afflicted, we can further on no longer carouse,
no longer feast\^.

3\) This sentence is missing in Dietrich.

1426 s. XXV.SS-6S. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2078-2081.
1427

But this seems to me to be the opinion: Your granaries (thesauri) are
desolate, that is, what should have been put in there and stored up for
use in another year or in some emergency has all gone to ruin. For the
Hebrews call treasure (thesaurum) what is stored in warehouses 1) or
sheds, in German \"der Vorrath\". 2) Likewise the seed is rotten, that
is, not only has that perished which was to provide you with daily food,
but also the seed will not be left for you; all this is rotten. You have
no hope that you will get anything or even keep the seed.

**The \"Scheure\" have disintegrated.**

As if he wanted to say: It will not be necessary to build sheds, you
will not bring in anything that serves as food; everything will even be
destroyed by this plague, so that no seed will remain for you.

**V. 18. O how the beast sighs! 2c.**

Thus, according to the Hebrew, it reads instead: Quid ingemuit \[in the
Vulgate\]. That is, it is to be pitied, for the cattle and the herds of
plow animals lack their pasture with which they should be fed.

**And the sheep pine away.**

According to the Hebrew, \[instead of: Et greges pecorum in the
Vulgate\] read: Even the flocks of sheep have been destroyed. 3)

**V. 19. Lord, I call upon you.**

These are words of a miserable talker, which we in German can very well
apply to these

1\) Instead of dvvotdeeis should probably be read spotdeeis, which the
Vulgate offers.

L\) In our template: \"der für rath\".

3\) This section is missing in Dietrich. - Instead of MMD\'s \"lunLum in
the Erlanger and in the Weimarsche Msgäbe is Möge\" ovr\'E \[surn) to be
read\".

In this way, we can say: \"Oh Lord, have mercy, oh Lord God, how it is
going on!

**For the fire has burned the floodplains (speciosa) in the desert.**

This word has extraordinarily different meanings in the holy scriptures.
Because it means meadows, dwellings, huts and tents. Here it must be
translated by the word habitations (habitacula).

**The fire.**

I think that \"fire\" is taken figuratively here, so that the meaning is
this: These dwellings are so completely wiped out that one would like to
think that they are devastated by fire; but nevertheless I want everyone
to follow his opinion here.

**And the flame has lit all the trees in the field.**

I also take \"the flame\" figuratively, as if he wanted to say: The
trees are so completely destroyed that one could believe they were
burned by a flame. So there is no hope left to find food for people or
cattle.

**V. 20. Even the wild beasts cry out to you.**

**That is, even the wild beasts cry out and seek water with roaring to
quench their thirst, for eS is the same word \[XXX\] that is in the
Psalms fPs. 42, 2.\].**

**Dem the water streams find dried up.**

**They find no tears; they too must perish. Thus, in this first chapter,
the prophet Joel describes in the simplest terms the punishment and
destruction inflicted on the land by those beasts, as we have heard.**

4\) Instead of the following in Dietrich: have been inflicted by the
enraged enemies.

1428 L. XXV, W-\"7. Ausl\^ung of Joel (1.), Cap. 2, 1. W. VI, 20SI-AM.
142A

**The second chapter.**

In the first chapter, the prophet dealt with 1) the small plague of
locusts and beetles in order to draw a conclusion from it about the real
and complete destruction that threatened all of Israel, which he has to
deal with in this second chapter. But he speaks in general, naming
neither the Assyrians nor the Egyptians, since he describes an enemy
army that will come over Israel to indicate that it will be a great
destruction. God has always acted whimsically in His way in the
government of the world, and still does so today, so that we think that
everything is directed and governed by human counsel. But everything
that happens is God\'s will. And this is also how the prophet interprets
it here, that the calamity that will come is the work of the Lord, not
of the enemies, and that the enemies will be strong, not by their
powers, not by their strength, but that of the Lord. For he says (v. 11)
that the Lord will make his thunder come before his army, and so
frighten Israel by awakening the consciousness of sin, so that it cannot
stand, and cannot help but be afraid even of a falling leaf.

The same is evidently true of the Turk in our time. It is well known to
us how much his empire and power have grown in a few years. He is lucky
and almost everywhere walks away victorious, but our people are
defeated, and he will certainly come over us at last, for he is a very
obvious scourge of God. Just as we are in the habit of preaching that
the Turk will come, so the prophet has done the same in this chapter.
The Israelite people dwelt in the midst of enemies, and were greatly
hated by the nations that dwelt round about, as by the Amorites, the

1\) Here Dietrich continues in such a way: in figurative speech the
future plague told. Here he speaks without picture in general, by naming
neither the Assyrians nor the Egyptians, but he describes par excellence
em hostile army, which over Israel 2c.

Moabites, the Hagarenes 2c., 2) with whom it always had quarrels. And
its most distinguished enemy at that time was the king of Assyria,
because with the Assyrian kingdom was the supremacy. And the prophets,
who had this in mind, threatened the people that all at once either the
Assyrians or the Babylonians would be there to devastate all Israel.

Jerome and other exegetes of the prophets are extremely agonizing about
the context of the text, because they do not see the whole history
(factum) or the whole thing as the Holy Spirit has summarized it, namely
the people and Christ\'s kingdom. Therefore, those who want to
understand it, should at the same time take a look at the kingdom of
Israel and the kingdom of Christ, then it will be connected in the best
way.

In the second chapter, therefore, the true and actual plague is
prophesied, which will destroy the whole nation of Israel. But he
threatens and calls to repentance, as we will see in the context when we
explain the two parts of the chapter, as if he wanted to say: Beware,
beware, repent, come to your senses, the Lord will visit you, \"it will
come to ruin\".

**V. 1. Blow with the trumpet to Zion, shout (ululate) on my holy
mountain.**

Instead of what we read \[in the Vulgate\], ululate \[howl\], should
more properly be read according to the Hebrew: conclamate or: shout
aloud.

In the fourth book of Moses, the blowing of the trumpets is described by
Moses \[Deut. 10:2 ff\], as it should be done when the princes of the
people should assemble, when the people, when peace or war is indicated.

2\) Dietrich leaves the following in this paragraph and puts for it:
Above all, however, the king of Assyria was enemy to him who was the
world ruler at that time. Of this the prophet says here before, he will
come and will plague them. Wett it however immediately on the kingdom of
Christ passes, so torment Jerome 2c.

1430xxv , 67-70. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2034-2037. 1434

just as we have a certain way of blowing the trumpet when there are
enemies or when fire rages in the city 2c. Therefore, the prophet
exhorts them to shout loudly to gather all the people, as if to say:
Call, call, call all the people, \"ring with all the bells\", as it is
done in our country, so that all the people may hear that desolation
threatens them. Let us forestall your enemy, let us repent 2c., as he
also says:

**Tremble, all the inhabitants of the land.**

We say \[instead of conturbentur in the Vulgate\]: commoveantur \[they
may move\], that is, all shall be present, it is for all.

**For the day of the Lord is coming.**

\"The day of the LORD\" the prophets call not only the last day, the day
of judgment, but any day of visitation, as Peter also calls it the day
of looking after *(Ιπισχοπης*\]), of visitation \[1 Pet. 2, 12.\]. For
in his time the HEART comes and destroys those whom he has wished to
destroy, whom he has seen through the fingers for a time. And then this
is called the day of the Lord, which is the day when God visits us
either in mercy or in wrath.

**And is close.**

Instead of: Quia prope est \[in the Vulgate\] it is said according to
the Hebrew: which is near. All prophetic threats read as if what they
predict is at the door, as Peter also predicted that the day of judgment
would come shortly \[2 Petr. 3, 10\]. But here the longsuffering of God
invites us to repentance. Here the prayers of godly people are praised
to us. 1)

**V. 2. a dark day, a dark day.**

Here is another Construction, and this need not be connected with the
preceding, as it is in our books \[in the

1\) This sentence is missing in Dietrich: Here \--praised.

Vulgate) is connected. As if he wanted to say: Surely, all at once, an
enemy nation will come upon us and devastate everything, so that we will
not be able to escape. But one must pay attention to this way of
speaking of the Scriptures: The Scripture calls light and peace the
happy prosperity of things, \"when things are well\", but darkness,
\"when things are bad\". So Solomon used Proverbs 31:18: \"Her light
does not go out at night.\" And these are poetic expressions that occur
frequently among poets. Therefore he calls \"a dark day, a gloomy day, a
cloudy day, a misty day\" sad times, and the day of adversity and
tribulation.

**Just as the dawn spreads over the mountains.**

It is a similitude by which he indicates the power of the coming war
army of the enemies. The dawn cannot be held back; no one can escape it.
Of such a nature, he says, will also be the multitude of the coming
enemy, whose hand we will not be able to escape, just as the mountains
cannot escape the light of the rising sun, lest it come upon them and
make them visible and show them. This is how it happened to us with the
Turk. The Greeks were safe and thought that there was no danger; then
suddenly the Turk came and forced them under his yoke. This is what Paul
says \[1 Thess. 5, 3.): \"When they shall say, There is peace, there is
no danger, then destruction shall quickly overtake them.\" The same
thing is shown today by our people in a very clear way. When they want
to comfort themselves, they say: \"It will not come upon us, the enemy
facing us will not be able to do anything, because the Lord is with us.
Quite right: the Lord stands by the godly, he protects them, he saves
them, but not also the godless.

**V. 3. A consuming fire goes out from him, and after him a burning
flame.**

Jerome wants to refer this text to the locusts and beetles, but not
well. For he must refer to the Assyrians or to the

1432 **xxv, 7o-7\>.** Interpretation of Joel (1.), Cap. 2, 3-6. **W. vi,
2087-2090.** 1433

The fire refers to the people who were to destroy Israel, which will be
shown below by the very clear words of the text. As I said in the first
chapter that the fire must be taken figuratively, so it is also here. As
if he wanted to say: As the fire eats, consumes and turns everything
into ashes, so also this people, which will come over you, will spoil
everything and destroy it completely.

**The land is like a pleasure garden before him.**

Exactly the same word is in the first book of Moses \[Cap. 2, 8.\],
where Moses describes the paradise. He holds here the future desolation
against the country which stands in bloom, as if he wanted to say: If
you compare the following desolation with the present abundance, now
everything will seem to bloom, everything will seem to be in abundance,
but everything is prepared for the fire and the desolation; nothing will
be left, everything will perish and be destroyed. In the same way, we
also erect magnificent buildings, we pile up many things that others
will destroy, just as the tower of Babel was first built magnificently
and splendidly, so that it would be destroyed by the Lord afterwards.
Also the kingdom of Israel was so completely destroyed that it could
never heal the damage afterwards. It never rose again, it never became
as glorious as it was before, it did not build so magnificently, it did
not have so great troops, not so great riches, in short, it remained
without glory. This is what the Lord does to all empires that he wants
to destroy and overthrow. This is what happened to Rome, Corinth, Milan,
Jerusalem 2c. Of these cities it is well known how great they flourished
and how powerful they were, but after they were destroyed once by the
Lord, they were never able to repair the damage. This is what the
prophet says: \"But after him like a desolate wasteland.\"

**V. 4. They find fashioned like horses and run like horsemen.**

Through this he describes the bravery of the coming people, that they
will run quickly and fight bravely.

V. 5. **They therefore blast (exilient) on the top of the mountains, as
the chariots rattle.**

That means: which cannot be resisted; everywhere they will have the
upper hand. And expressly he adds: \"They blast\" (salient). This word
is also in the Psalm \[Ps. 114, 4.\]: \"The mountains leaped 1) like
lambs, the hills like young sheep. As if the prophet wanted to say: So
much is missing that they should fear your power or your resistance,
that they will also rejoice and go to your desolation with joy; \"they
will lionize\" 2) for joy, because that is what it actually means.

**And like a flame blazes in the straw.**

That is, as straw is immediately consumed by fire, and consumed in such
a way that nothing remains, so you will become a prey to the Assyrian or
the Babylonian.

V. 6. **The nations will be astonished before him.**

Before him the nations will tremble like a woman in childbirth, that is,
not only you will perish, but also all the other countries will be
devastated with you by this kingdom of the Assyrians. All of these will
lie in birth pains, that is, they will be frightened, they will be
afflicted. This word is often used in Scripture, for it is taken from
the pains of women in childbirth, who, when they are in birth pains, do
not know whether they will die or live. They would like to escape the
pain, but they cannot. So Paul also used it in the Epistle to the
Romans, Cap. 8, 22: \"All creature longs with nns, and fears
*\[συνωδΐνει* = has birth pains\^ with us stilldar.\" And in the Psalms
one reads it frequently. But it means fear and torment in dangers from
which one cannot escape, knowing no way in which lnan could escape.

1\) In the Erlangen and Weimar editions: 6xaltav6runt instead of
\"xultsvsrunt, as must be read according to the context and the Vulgate
(exsuUastm).

2\) In the original: \"lick\". Compare Apost. 9, 5; likewise Walch, St.
Louis Edition, Vol. Ill, 962, note 2.

1434 n xxv, 72-74. interpretations on the prophets. W.vi.MW f. 1435

**All faces are as pale as the pots (Omnes vultus redigentur in
ollam).**

1)What this is is not completely clear to me. But almost the same figure
of speech is found in the prophet Nahum Cap. 2, 11. \[Vulg.\]: \"The
face of all is like the blackness of a pot.\" The one who translated it
in this way was of the opinion that the people would become so sad and
depressed by grief that they would go about black with sadness, and
emaciated, as black clothes are used to be a sign of grief. But I do not
like this opinion, because the Hebrew reads differently. For so it is
written in the Hebrew: All faces will be gathered in one pot. So also
here I would like this passage to be understood in this way, and this is
my opinion, as if he wanted to say: They have broken my people like meat
in a pot. This matter is also indicated in Moses \[3 Mos. 1, 6. 12.\] by
the flesh that is to be cut in pieces. The Jews are not to be trusted in
this matter, because they do not have the Hebrew language completely
anymore. Therefore, they like Jerome\'s opinion. Congregabuntur in ollam
\[they shall be gathered into one pot\], \"they shall be bruised,\" as
flesh is wont to be cut in pieces and thrown into a pot; \"they shall be
broken up as into a cauldron,\" as Micah Cap. 3:3, that is, they will
not be able to escape the power of the adversary. For it is absolutely
certain that the word \"assemble\" is here in the Hebrew. For so one
reads: they will be gathered into one pot, or: they will be brought,
\"it will go in heaps\". 2) And so the

1\) Instead of the whole following passage Dietrich offers: It is a
whimsical and foreign image to our way of speaking, which Nahum also
uses Cap. 2, 11. \[Vulg.\]: \"The face of all is like the blackness of a
pot.\" Jerome so interprets it, and I do not dislike the opinion ser:
Because of this calamity the Jews will be so cast down and mourn that
they will seem to grow pale or black as pots. For as in joy, when the
blood flows, men become red, so in sadness and affliction, when courage
withdraws, a kind of blackish pallor remains.

2\) The Weimar edition here asks the question, \"Ob Haussen - Haffen,
Hafen, Gefäß?\" We answer: No, but \"Haufen\", because here we are given
the translation of vonArsMbuntnr. The Zwickau manuscript also has
\"hausten\" here. Wr Hemerken this here, far the Wei

The image is taken from the flesh that has been cut up and thrown into a
pot. It is almost a similar figure of speech also in Isaiah \[Cap. 3,
6.): \"Then one will seize his brother from his father\'s house\" 2c.
\[Cap. 3, 8.:) \"For Jerusalem is falling away, and Judah is lying
there\" 2c.

**V. 7. She will\" run like the giants.**

This must not at all be understood by the locusts, as Jerome/ wants it
to be understood, what also several other text words will indicate
below. But the meaning is: these enemies are very brave and very
warlike; they will fight against you without fear 2c.

**Each one will go straight ahead (Viri iu viis suis gradientur).**

According to the Hebrew it is to be read thus: Every man shall go his
way. For the word \"man\" (viri) in Hebrew is sometimes an expression
which comprehends everything in general (signum universale
affirmativum), namely, \"every one,\" as immediately \[v. 8.\] follows:
\"None shall err the other.\" This, then, is the opinion: they will go
on their ways, that is, they will break through, and no one will be able
to resist them.

**And will not default (Et non declinabunt).**

That is, \"they will not be missed.\"

**V. 8. and will break through the weapons (Sed et per fenestras
cadent).**

That is whimsical, if it should be translated so correctly. The seventy
interpreters have translated \"projectile\" (jaculum) instead of
\"window\" (fenestra). I translate it like this: 4) And before the
projectile they will fall down and will not be wounded. As if he wanted
to say: GOD

In v. 20 of this chapter, another false explanation is based on this
false conjecture, namely: rotten - fall. But there, too, it must mean
\"rotten\"; it speaks of rottenness.

3\) Dietrich leaves out the words: \"as Jerome wants it to be
understood\".

4\) Dietrich continues thus: When they will break in, they will not be
wounded by sword or bullets. As wanted 2c.

1436 L. XXV, 74-76. interpretation of Joel (I.), Cap. 2, 8. 10-12. W.
VI, SV9I-2V93. 1437

will give luck to the attack of the enemies, so that even though
projectiles are in front of them, they can fall down, so that the
projectiles will not hit them, nor will they be wounded, so that you
will aim the bow against them in vain with your arrows, which you will
hurl against them; they will be able to dodge them splendidly.

V. 10. The **land trembles because of him.**

This text reads as if the prophet is talking about the last judgment;
but this is not the case. But this is the opinion of the prophet, as if
he wanted to say: The earth will shake, the stars will lose their shine.
All this is said out of such a movement of the heart as is found in
people who stand in fear and terror, 1) because to those who are to die
and stand in such fear everything seems to be black, sad, repugnant and
hostile, but to the joyful even what is otherwise not at all lovely is
nevertheless lovely, since they can rejoice even over a dirt 2) or any
thing, however small. Out of such a movement of the heart the prophet
now speaks, that although the sun is exceedingly lovely and shining, the
stars quite bright, nevertheless everything seems to be disturbed.

V. 11 **For the LORD will send his thunder before his army.**

All this, he says, will happen, not because the enemies are so powerful,
not because they can do so much through their strength, but because it
is the will of the Lord, because the Lord will frighten us with his
thunder and we will not be able to withstand it. It is not because they
are powerful, but because we sin that such calamities will befall us.
This is the most horrible and terrible thing in any adversity, when God
frightens us by the revealed consciousness of sin. Those who are so
frightened lose all courage and confidence, so that even a falling leaf
can frighten us, as I said in the beginning of this chapter. Otherwise,
all the devils, when they come upon a godly man, would also be afraid of
him.

1\) In the Weimar: xaventium; in the Jena and Erlangen: Mtientium.

2\) The words de stsroorS ant are missing in Dietrich.

But if his conscience before God is unharmed, if he knows that God still
wants him to be well, that He will not abandon him 2c. But when the LORD
lets his thunder come\", \"when he takes our heart, he fights well with
us\"; here no one can stand.

**For the day of the LORD is great.**

It is not the day of your adversaries, but it is \"the day of the
Lord\", although the Assyrians think that by their forces such things
will be carried out; but it is the Lord\'s forces. This is the way of
the prophets when they describe such plagues, that they take everything
from men and the powers of men, and attribute it to God and the powers
of God. For God proceeds in this way: He sends down His thunder, by
which He frightens the conscience of those whom He wants to destroy, and
those who are thus frightened must inevitably succumb, no matter how
great their powers and weapons may be 2c. The same is done by the Lord
in every victory.

Up to this point, the prophet has kept the destruction before his eyes,
by which he wanted to call them to repentance, so that they would be
able to get along again and avoid the future misfortune. Now follows the
second part of the chapter.

V. 12. **Turn to me with all your heart.**

So far we have heard God\'s serious threat of future persecution and
plague. Now he adds a counsel and comforts them, whether 3) he could
avert this destruction or at least postpone it. But it is not averted,
but postponed. We see this also in Abraham, who pleaded with such
urgency for the preservation of Sodom that he also delayed the judgment
of God; but he

3\) Instead of what follows until \"postponed\" Dietrich has the
following: whether they wanted to be brought back to the right way and
thus escape the punishment. For the Lord does not want the sinner to
die, but rather to be taught and to live \[Ezek. 18, 23.f. And therefore
he is patient and long-suffering, so that there may be room for
repentance. But those who do not want to return to the right way face a
punishment that is all the greater, and they heap wrath upon themselves.
But this admonition was in vain with the Jews. Because the punishment is
not averted, but only postponed.

4438 xxv, 7\"-7s. \'Interpretations\' on the prophets. W. vr, Mss-rross.
4439

did nothing, they would not repent. Therefore, the wrath of God finally
came upon them, and they were all wiped out with each other. Therefore,
the prophet here prescribes the way to meet this calamity, but since the
people finally did not stand firm, the judgment of God followed, which
had been threatened to them here.

**With all my heart (In toto corde vestro).**

This is a peculiar Hebrew way of speaking, and is as much as toto ooräo,
for in is superfluous. He expressly says: \"With all my heart\", not
invented, but true, without all hypocrisy. He touches the hypocrisy
quite well and the servile worship of the hypocrites, of which it is
said in the 78th Psalm, v. 34. and 37.: \"When he strangled them, they
sought him, and turned\" early to GOD\" 2c., \"but their heart was not
steadfast in him.\" For the hypocrites pretend repentance at the time of
persecution, but not with a firm or whole heart. 1)

**With fasting, with weeping, with lamentations.**

Do these outward things matter? Is not true repentance of the heart
alone sufficient? Certainly; but by the fruits we know the tree. He
indeed demands fasting, weeping, lamenting 2c., but he sends in advance:
\"With all my heart\", as if he wanted to say: If they do not come out
of the

1\) Here Dietrich brings the following addition: Howbeit he excludes
hypocrisy afterwards, since he says fV. 13\] he says: Rend not your
garments, but your hearts, yet here also he clearly commands the same.
First of all he says: \"Convert yourselves\", thus he demands a new
being. Who is to be converted? \"You.\" This pronoun \"you \"4 wants not
only a part of man or external, bodily works to be changed, but the
whole man, that he at first displeases himself and hates sin, then also
puts hope in mercy and believes that God, for the sake of the promised
seed, will forgive out of grace, in vain; as he does not here present
merits, not hard or bitter works, in which we are to trust, but only the
mercy and kindness of GOD, which he has presented to us in word and in
his promises. This is an excellent passage. Since the papists make use
of it for merit from works, they do not see how everything is contrary
to merit and works. For he demands true repentance, which does not
consist in drunkenness or revelry, but in weeping, tears, fasting 2c.
And yet he holds out the mere mercy in which they should hope, and
promises that he will forgive by grace, in vain.

If they come forth from the whole heart, they are hypocrisy and count
for nothing; but true conversion is then manifested by these outward
signs. Thus conversion is beautifully described by the Holy Spirit, that
the heart first repents in truth, 2) not in appearance, then also
outwardly shows faith 3) through these works. If this is not there, then
everything else is nothing, as the prophet also expressly adds:

**V. 13. Rend your hearts and not your garments 2c.**

This he diligently adds to condemn hypocrisy. This was the custom of the
Jews, that when they were grieved or in mourning over some matter, they
tore their garments, which can be seen throughout the Scriptures,
indicating the great and violent movement of the heart; but through long
habit this finally degenerated into hypocrisy, just as with us
genuflecting, the so-called processions, and many other things have
become mere hypocrisy. Therefore he wants the hearts to be torn, not
only the clothes, as if he wanted to say: You sometimes tear your
clothes out of hypocrisy, but not the hearts.

**And turn to the Lord.**

As if to say: This will be the way: if you want to come with all your
heart and in truth, turn to the Lord, otherwise it will not happen.

**For he is gracious, merciful (Quia benignus et misericors).**

Benignus \[kind\] is what we more properly call gracious, favorable,
\"gracious\". Misericors: the Hebrew word XXXX actually means
\"merciful\", who has mercy, who bears sorrow with us over our fall.

**And of great goodness (multae misericordiae).**

\[Instead of misericordiae\] more correctly: good deeds that help all
superfluously. All this is

2\) In Dietrich\'s case, only the words follow until the end of this
paragraph: When this happens, these external things also follow.

3\) Instead of Udsi we have assumed; because otherwise an object to
ostkiukut is missing.

1440 L. xxv, 79-si. Interpretation of Joel (1.), cap. 2, 13. **w. vi,
2096-2098.** 1441

In the Psalm \[Ps. 145, 8.\]: \"Gracious and merciful is the Lord,
patient and of great kindness\" 1) 2c.

**And repent him soon of the punishment (Praestabilis super malitia).**

What the Latin sin of the Vulgate\] means is not clear to me. But in the
Hebrew it reads thus: It repents him easily of the evil, namely, which
he has intended to do. \"He soon desists from the evil he is about to
do.\" This expression occurs everywhere in the prophets as a common one,
as in Jeremiah \[Cap. 18, 8.\]: \"Where a kingdom turns from its
wickedness, so shall I also repent of the evil\" 2c. And such repentance
is often attributed to \'GOtte, namely, when he changes his judgment
with respect to the evil which he had presumed to inflict. But the
opinion is as if you said: He is easily at hand with it, that he
forgives. 2) These promises are very beautiful, and very rich and very
extensive, 3) held out by the Holy Spirit for this reason, so that in
the time of the Lord\'s wrath and anger, the despondent soul or
conscience, when it wants to seek comfort, may take refuge in them and
be mindful of them. For one can see here the wonderful counsel of the
Spirit of God, who has so far made the threat all the greater and
increased it, so that he might point them to the goodness and mercy of
God, thereby indicating that the wrath and anger of God serve salvation,
so that sinners, thus frightened by the threats and judgment of God,
might come to terms, and recognize and take hold of God as a merciful
Father. For this is why he frightens sinners so much, so that their her-

1\) Here the Weimar edition notes: \"\'Wit. (should read 3sn., for in
the Wittenberg our Scripture says nothing cites psaloa 144 and 85 s. but
ps. 103.\" The Jena one is right about \"ksal. 144\" (according to the
Vulgate\'s count), for pstisns is found there, which our text offers,
whereas Ps. 103, 8. Icmasnirms. The citation of \"kssl. 85\" (86, 15.\]
is justified by the fact that only there the reading: Laultas
missrioordia\" is found, while in the other two Psalms it is written:
multum missrisors.

2\) This sentence is missing in Dietrich.

b\) The Weimar edition notes here arnplissioas as eme deviation of
Dietrich, but in the Jena edition rst the reading awplissimas.

The prophets are the ones who want to raise up the people in the hope of
God\'s mercy. 4) And all prophets have this way, that they first scare
with the strongest and most severe threats, but immediately add the
greatest and sweetest promises of God\'s mercy and kindness. But the
effect of both words (namely, the threats and the promises) is different
in the godly than in the ungodly. 5) For the wicked make no right use of
either the promises or the threats. For when they hear the threats, they
do not think that they are concerned with them. Thus they promote their
hypocrisy, and thus they persist in their ungodly nature, which they
nevertheless believe to be the highest godliness. 6) That is why the
rich promises are not effective with them, since they only require
sorrowful and broken hearts. Because this is not brought about in the
wicked by the threats, the promises are not effective with them either.
The godly, however, use them rightly, for through the wrath of God and
the threat they are crushed and cast down, they suffer the divine
judgment, they recognize their sin and condemnation. Therefore, when
they hear the promises, they turn to the mercy of God, and thus their
consciences are again straightened and calmed. The wicked are quite hard
anvils; they are not moved by all this. 8) They have never acted
differently, so we hope in vain that they will act differently nowadays.
But this is the way of God, that He leads His faithful into hell rather
than leading them out; but at last He leads back and comforts those who
are thus damned and frightened. Thus we see today in our

4\) Here we have followed Dietrich\'s reading as the better one: ut
tzriKÄQtur eorda in sps Misericordias instead of: ut sriZant sorum eorda
in sps st missricordia in our original.

5\) This sentence is missing in Dietrich; with \[sd he lines up the
following.

6\) Instead of the following sentence Dietrich has: Then they take hold
of the promises, but only as long as it goes well with them. In
misfortune, however, they despair, because the word of God has not
struck in them. The godly, however, use both doctrines correctly,
because 2c.

7\) Dietrich: Darnach. .

8\) The following up to \"Thus we see\" is missing in Dietrich.

1442 L. xxv. 8i-83. interpretations on the prophets. W. vr. MS8-2101.
1443

The same is clearly true of the wicked. All the time since we received
the holy gospel of the great God by the grace of Christ, our princes
have done nothing but stubbornly oppose God. 1) When we preach God\'s
judgment and the coming vengeance, we are ridiculed by them, since they
do not want to be accused of any ungodliness, 2) and they pretend that
they are also most on the side of the gospel. Since they are so blinded,
they cannot be moved by any threats, and God in the meantime postpones
His judgment, which He undoubtedly intended for them long ago; He
postpones it, I say, for the sake of some godly people, lest they also
perish with the ungodly, and thus bring disgrace to the Gospel. When
these godly ones are gone, these despisers will finally feel the wrath
and vengeance of God upon them. This is what Isaiah says (Cap. 57, 1.\]:
\"The righteous perishes, and there is no one who takes it to heart.\"
For this counsel of the LORD is hid, why by and by he gathereth the
godly unto the fathers, but at last it is known 2c.

This passage of the prophet must certainly be remembered, for it is one
of the most distinguished. God cannot but save His blessed ones, whom He
terrifies with His judgment, but does not let them despair. For
consolation follows immediately; even for the sake of the godly alone,
consolation is added. The same thing can be seen in all prophets, that
they first threaten very frightening things, but then add the sweetest
consolations. For when consciences have become frightened and
distressed, the word of threat has done its work; therefore, the heart
must be straightened immediately, so that, after being frightened and
distressed, it may take hold of the mercy and goodness of God. When this
happens, his bones become fat again \[Proverbs 15:30\].

**V. 14. Who knows, it may again repent him (Quis scit, si convertatur
et ignoscat).**

1\) Instead of this sentence Dietrich has: The pope, the bishops, the
princes, the noblemen stubbornly oppose GOtte.

2\) The following in this sentence is missing in Dietrich.

He speaks here in the manner of a frightened conscience, which finally
hardly straightens itself after the tribulation and begins to breathe
again for hope and God\'s goodness. 3) But even here (in the Vulgate) it
is not translated very well. In German we say: \"Wer weiß, er möcht sich
umkehren\" (Who knows, he may turn back), and it may repent him of the
evil, that is, he may desist from the evil he reproaches, he may not
continue to wish us ill 2c.

**And leave behind a blessing.**

That is, he will not be so angry that he should not show remnants of
mercy. At least, this is what happens in the case of shattered
consciences, so that they themselves desire only a morsel of God\'s
goodness and mercy. This can be seen in the Canaanite woman that is
mentioned in the Gospel (Matth. 15, 27.). And so the bruised and
humiliated conscience is comforted. 4) Such things are known and
understood by those who have experienced them. That is why the prophet
used especially appropriate words, which are to be regretted that they
are translated so obscurely in our books. For thus it is written in the
Hebrew: Et faciet aliquas reliquias, benedictionis suae post \[And he
will leave behind him some remnants of his blessing) (post, that is,
afterward), 5) namely, that in him be used all anger and displeasure,
but that he also show a sample of goodness and mercy. For we see here
what a thing the conscience is, how stiffly and firmly it preserves the
hope created in relation to God - how even in the highest despair, in
the greatest affliction and fear it grasps God\'s goodness, still hopes
for good from God; as much as it sees God\'s wrath in all creatures, 6)
as much as it also sees that God has not blamed the whole world for its
evil.

3\) From 8\"? to the end of this paragraph Dietrich offers: Furthermore,
this is ems Hebrew way of speaking, which does not indicate a doubt, but
an assertion (aKrumtionsm) with a wish, as if I said in German: \"He
will, whether GOtt wills, still turn.\" For both mean the hope, of a
change and a wish. In Latin it cannot be rendered so well. For when one
says: Huis seit? it reads doubtful.

4\) This sentence is missing in Dietrich.

5\) In the original: (i. s. her naher). This parenthesis is missing in
Dietrich.

. 6) The words: \"so much - GOtteS sees\" are missing from

1444 L- xxv, 8Z-86. interpretation of Joel (1.), Cap. 2, 14-17. w. vi,
2101-2103. 1445

Nevertheless, it does not despair. He believes that mercy and
reconciliation are still open to him. And this we must remember very
well, for this passage is a very general saying that is useful in all
temptations. 1) Therefore let us be well instructed in this passage, so
that we may have recourse to it in our temptations, whatever they may be
2c. He further adds:

**To offer grain offerings and drink offerings to the LORD your God.**

This is related to the preceding in this way: God will not forget His
goodness so much that He should not leave some remnants behind, namely
the grain offering and the drink offering to the Lord, your God, 2) that
is, that we can still offer grain offerings and drink offerings to the
Lord, serve Him and proclaim His miraculous deeds 2c. It is the same
thing that is said in the Psalm \[Ps. 42, 6.\]: \"Why do you grieve, my
soul, and are so troubled within me? Harp out of GOD, for I will yet
give thanks to Him\" 2c. Likewise elsewhere \[Ps. 118, 17.\], \"I will
not die, but live, and declare the work of the LORD.\" So also in the
6th Psalm, v. 2. \"Lord, be merciful to me, for I am weak\" 2c. \[V. 5.
6.:\] \"Help me for thy goodness\' sake. For in death thou art not
remembered; who will thank thee iw hell?\" But still all this is a
wavering between hope and despair. 3) Hence the opinion: He will have
mercy on us, he will let go of his wrath; the Lord will show us a kind
face, let us only repent; he will show us a kind face, let us only
repent; he will show us a kind face, let us only repent; he will show us
a kind face, let us only repent; he will show us a kind face, let us
only repent.

1\) This sentence is missing in Dietrich.

2\) Instead of what follows here to \"Ps. 42, 6.\", Dietrich has the
following: He also uses here, as below, two certain kinds of sacrifices,
to indicate that he is not speaking of the sacrifices of Moses (for then
he would have mentioned the burnt offering, which was the most
glorious), but of the worship of the mind, that is, of the prayer and
thanksgiving which the godly offer to God. For when they suffer
tribulation, they pray, and when they are saved, they give thanks, as
these two pieces are also connected in the Psalms \[Ps. SO, 15/): \"Call
upon me in trouble, and I will save you, and you shall praise me\";
likewise M 42, 6.s: \"Why do you grieve?

3\) Dietrich has omitted this sentence.

not reject, let us only seize his goodness. There will be something left
of his mercy, he will not be angry forever 2c. 4)

V. 15. **Blow with the trumpet to Zion, sanctify a fast.**

Now the prophet himself speaks, prescribing the way they should speak
and the way they should convert, so that we see everywhere the faithful
teacher, the Holy Spirit, 5) who so much does not want our condemnation,
that he also prescribes for us the way of prayer and repentance, which
is certainly an immensely great comfort.

V. 16. The **bridegroom goes out of his chamber.**

He explains in general what he understood by \"fasting\", namely not
only the abstention from food, 6) but that they should also abstain and
moderate themselves in all pleasures and amusements. And therefore he
wants the elders, the young people, in short, all the people, to be
called, so that it may be known to all. Behold, what a fierce movement
of heart there is even in the prophet who so desired the salvation of
the people.

**V. 17. Let the priests, the Lord\'s servants, weep between the hall
and the altar, saying:**

This is how he teaches them to pray.

**Lord, spare your people.**

This text is sufficiently clear to confirm my opinion, which I expressed
at the beginning of the chapter, that the prophet does not speak of
locusts, but of

4\) Instead of \"etc.\" Dietrich continues: namely, that the grain
offering and drink offering remain, that is, that he praise his mercy to
us, and that we sink to him, praise him, extol him, honor him 2c.

5\) Instead of the preceding, Dietrich has: Here he now lays out the
piece of the libation, and prescribes a form of the prayer. But here the
Holy Spirit praises us for his mercy, which is even 2c.

6\) Here Dietrich puts \"by the prophet\" instead of the following: but
that they should put their whole mind to prayer, setting aside all the
aggravations that could prevent the heart from praying earnestly.
Furthermore, he does not condemn weddings here, but demands earnest
prayer, which he does not want to be hindered by anything. But you see
here the violent heart movement in the prophet 2c.

1446 L. XXV, 86-88. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 2103-2106.
1447

a hostile army, either Assyrian or Babylonian, which would devastate and
destroy all of Israel 2c. 1)

**Your Inheritance.**

That is, your Israelite people.

**Heiden.**

Nationes, that is, \"heathens,\" which, however, he does not name.

**Why will you let the peoples say, \"Where is their God?**

Thus, the prophets always urge the Lord with His own glory. And
certainly, this prayer is very powerful and is able to do much with God.
As if he wants to say: What will finally happen, O Lord, if you destroy
us all? The matter will be a disgrace to you, it will be at the risk of
your honor, because this matter will be an occasion for the unbelieving
heathen to blaspheme against your people and against your holy word.
\"If we all perish at once, it will be a disgrace to thee.\" And by this
prayer, God is surely persuaded. This was also known to Moses, who in
the same way opposed the Lord, who wanted to destroy Israel: it was
about his honor, which would be in danger, if this people would be
destroyed, which he had chosen for himself and had declared by many
signs and wonders to be his own in the clearest way. For so Moses says 2
Mos. 32, 12.: \"Why shall the Eaypter say and speak: He brought them out
to their calamity, to slay them in the mountains, and to destroy them
from off the face of the earth?\" 2c. And no doubt he spares us
nowadays, who are despisers of the gospel, 2) for the sake of his glory,
otherwise he would have proceeded against us with punishment long ago.
3) This

1\) Instead of: \"etc.\" Dietrich has: But it is also here one of the
most distinguished teachings of this prophet. For just as he taught
above about repentance and the mercy of God, so he also teaches here
about prayer, how powerful and pleasing it is to God. For he clearly
indicates that God will not only free those who pray from the impending
punishment, but also shower them with good of every kind. This had to be
often inculcated into the people in public sermons.

2\) Dietrich: us, and not us alone, but also the despisers 2c.

3\) From here to the end of the section, Dietrich offers the following
instead of our text: But it is useful that

is not an ordinary question, but a very difficult one, which also caused
the apostle Paul a lot of trouble, so that four chapters are hardly
enough to deal with it, as can be seen in the letter to the Romans, and
yet he only resolved the matter coldly and did not do it completely
enough\".

Consider this prayer carefully, for it should also be a way for us to
pray in all dangers. In the beginning he says: \"Spare\". Here he simply
takes refuge in mercy and the forgiveness of sins by grace, for nothing.
Wesseck is to be spared?

Thy people.\" See how the prayer or the faith of the one praying uses
the promise and hopes, since there is nothing to hope for. For the first
chapter has sufficiently indicated by the threats what the people were
like, and yet faith, setting aside the horror of its unworthiness, its
sins and the deserved punishment, fixes its eyes firmly on the single,
pure, certain mercy which the promise indicates. For if it looked at
itself according to its own condition, it would say: I am not the people
of God, but a people of the devil, since I have offended God with sins;
I have heaped upon myself the wrath of God, and God does not recognize
me for His people, since I have not acknowledged His commandments. So
faith here casts away its unworthiness, and looks to grace or the
promise. However I may be, he says, God has promised that he will be my
God, and I shall be his people. Therefore, O Lord, remember your word,
spare your people, and not only this, but \"your inheritance\". Here he
urges the promise even more. We are your inheritance and your portion,
which you have chosen for yourself. Surely you will not contradict
yourself, you will not revoke your word. For what other people will you
have when you have rejected us? We are your portion and your
inheritance, which you have adorned with your law, with your worship.
Will you let the heathen take possession of us? Will you allow yours to
be snatched away by those who blaspheme, hate, accuse and persecute you?
Therefore see first your danger, that your inheritance will perish, then
also your honor. For there is no other nation that has your name and
your worship. Therefore, if you reject us, it is not only for us but
also for your honor. For they will conclude from our destruction that
this doctrine and this worship were void, even that you are nothing but
a vain name, since you suffered that we alone, who had your word and
confessed your name against the idols of the Gentiles, should perish,
and perish by the idolatrous Gentiles and the ungodly. Therefore they
will boast their idols against you, and say: You are nothing, their
idols are the true Godhead 2c.

4\) This passage, because it attacks the apostle Paul, caused Dietrich
to make the change just mentioned. The other two manuscripts, the
Zwickau and the Hallische, do not have these sayings. It seems
unbelievable to us that Luther spoke in this way.

[1448 **L. XXV, 88-90.** interpretation of Joel (1.), cap. 2, 17, 18,
20. **W. VI, 2106-2108.** 1449]{.underline}

I am also an Israelite. Admittedly, an excellent solution. Therefore, we
will be far behind against him in the solution of this question. God
smites his people, but in such a way that the Gentiles cannot say: Where
is their God? although only the smallest part of the people is
preserved, as Paul also states as proof.

**V. 18. So then the LORD will be jealous for his land.**

What follows must all be read as if the verba were in the conjunctive or
optative, as also in Hosea the same must happen. And so the opinion will
be: 1) If you so humbled yourselves and converted to the Lord with all
your heart and so prayed: \"Lord, spare\" 2c., then what I say would
come true. But he speaks in the mode of the past, as if the Lord had
already done it, and yet he indicates that it would first come to pass,
as if to say, If ye prayed thus, and were converted, it would come to
pass that the Lord would be zealous for his land, and spare his people;
he would answer and say, 2c. And so he reminds them of the truthfulness
of God: as if he wanted to say: You would finally learn from experience
that the Lord had become of a different mind and wanted you well 2c.
when he sent you grain and wine and oil 2c.

**V. 20. and will drive him far from you from midnight.**

This text has also been understood by the locusts, but not well. For he
speaks of the coming king, of whom he says that he will resist him, that
he cannot harm them if they only repent; as if to say, \"If you will be
pious, I will well resist the Assyrian.\" 2)

**And cast him out into a barren and desolate land.**

Jerome struggles a lot here. My opinion is, as I have said, that it is
too ver-

1\) Weimarsche: erat; Jenaer and Erlanger: erit.

2\) Instead of these words: \"Will - resist\" DieArch: But I am
completely of the opinion that he speaks of the Assyn Sanherib, of whom
Is. 36 and 37 and in the books of the kings is said.

as if it were in the conjunctive. Jerome explains it simply indicatively
by citing the history of how Sanherib was killed and 185,000 men were
killed by the angel in the camp of the Assyrians, Isa. 37. 3) But what
history can you give me of the stench and rottenness that the prophet
Joel immediately adds here? But since we do not know the custom and
usage of the Hebrew language, nor can this be obtained from the grammar,
just as there is much in other languages, we must assume. At that time,
when this was spoken, it was understood very well by the Jews. In my
opinion, this is the opinion, as if he wanted to say: Have faith, take
courage, repent, I will make it happen that you will not be overcome by
the Assyrian, because he is in my hand, \"I will throw him where I want
him to go, so that one piece will be rotten here, the other there\". So
we will also understand what follows.

**Namely, his face toward the sea toward morning 2c.**

^5^ ) The front sea he calls the dead sea. The outermost sea or the sea
towards the evening he calls the middle sea. Between the two is the
kingdom of Judah. Therefore the opinion is: If you will have converted,
I will damp the Assyrian, will so ruin him that he is thrown after the
one part into the dead sea, after the other part into the large sea, and
so rots and decays in the country. This seems to me to be the simplest
meaning.

**For he has done great things (Quia superbe egit.**

3\) Instead of this sentence Dietrich has: But also Jerome, although he
explains it indicatively, understands it nevertheless of how Sanherib
was put to flight and 185,000 men were killed in the camp of the
Assyrians, Isa. 37. - He omits everything following.

4\) \"Rotten\" here is not, as the Weimarsche means, \"- fall\", because
it is spoken of \"rotting\". Compare the note to v. 6 of this chapter,
since the Weimarsche refers to that passage.

5\) Instead of this paragraph Dietrich has: The opinion is to be taken
most simple, as if he wanted to say: I will scatter the king together
with his army, here and there, that they will be killed and rot. .

1450xxv , W-93. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2108-2110. 1451

1\) If I was free to use the Hebrew way of speaking here (hebraicari), I
would like to refer this to the Lord, not to the Afsyrian. For so it is
written in the Hebrew: Quoniam magnificavit facere. For it is quite the
same word which immediately follows in the next verse, where it is also
so translated by our \[Latin\] interpreter: Quoniam magnificavit
Dominus, ut faceret. It is also the same word in the 126th Psalm, v. 3.
\"The LORD hath done great things for us.\" And so the opinion would be:
The Lord will show his wrath quite magnificently, \"he will do something
brave with it\".

**V. 21. Do not be afraid, dear land.**

As if to say, \"When you have repented and turned to the Lord, the Lord
will do gloriously for you. The enemy army will not be able to do
anything against you, the Lord will make up for all the damage, you will
again have everything in abundance, wine, oil, animals in abundance,
everything that was previously destroyed by the locusts, 2) as he adds:

**V. 22. Do not be afraid, you animals of the field.**

As above he threatened the land, the people, the cattle with destruction
and desolation, so now again he comforts all in turn: it will not happen
that they perish; if they would only repent, everything would bear rich
fruit 2c.

**For the dwellings in the desert shall be green (Speciosa deserti).**

It is the same word \[XXXX\] which we had above in the first chapter
\[v. 19.\], since the

1\) Instead of the following passage Dietrich offers: This is a saying
full of consolation, but sim Latin) not at all well translated. Because
approximately so one reads in the Hebrew: He shall rot, and shall stink,
because he hath acted worthily of hope. But fear not, O land, for the
Lord can also act hopefully. For it is this word which the 126th Psalm
\[v. 3.) uses: \"The LORD hath done great things for us.\" Furthermore,
this promise serves to let them know that this kingdom will last until
Christ comes.

2\) Dietrich: the enemies.

3\) intsrnioism, a mixed word of intsrnseio and pervioiss, but the
Jenaer has correctly put intsrllsoionein for it.

Fire burns \"the pastures in the wilderness,\" that is, the dwellings,
the tabernacles. Therefore, as he said above that the dwellings were
consumed by fire, so now he says that they shall be green, that the
trees shall bring forth their fruit; they only want to repent.

**The fig trees and vines shall bear well (Ficus et vinea dederunt
virtutem suam).**

It is a Hebrew idiom: virtutsm kuum sihre strength), that is, their
ability, that is, the trees will give and bring forth what they have in
their strength. This word is also used in the 78\" Psalm, v. 51. In
short, it denotes that they will receive abundant and full fruit from
all things, for it indicates the driving force and efficacy in the
trees.

**V. 23. And you children of Zion 2c.**

It must be read filii, not lilas.

**Who gives you teachers for righteousness.**

This Hebrew word causes the translators to many different translations.
For in Hebrew it means both teacher and rain, which can be seen here in
this one verse of Joel, where the same word is translated by the word
\"teacher\" and \"rain\". Therefore we will understand it also here not
by a teacher, but by rain, and thus translate: for he will mercifully
give you rain. By the way, the word \"righteousness\" \[XXXX\], which
sees here, is translated quite well by the word grace or mercy, as it is
also translated in the Psalm \[Ps. 24, 5. Vulg.): \"He shall receive
blessings from the LORD, and mercy from the GOD of his salvation.\" So
we will take it adverbially here: He will mercifully give you rain.

4\) In the original, according to the Vulgate: in psalmo 77, but there
it is not the same word as here, but which has the same meaning. That
the citation given by us is correct, we have recognized from the Zwickau
manuscript, which offers here: \"77. psulm: prinutiss kto.\" According
to the Hebrew it means: the firstfruits of man\'s) power; Luther: \"the
first heirs\".

1452 K. XXV, \[s-ss. Interpretation of Joel (1.), cap. 2, 23-27. 3, 1.
W. VI, 2UI-21I3. 1453

**And sends down to you early rain and late rain.**

These two rains are often mentioned in the Scriptures, for both are very
necessary. As if he wanted to say: The Lord will give you rain in proper
alternation. The early rain he will give, so that the seeds grow, and
the late rain, so that the fruits do not wither, consumed by excessive
drought 2c. For without doubt these rains are proofs of the divine
mercy, so that the moisture of the earth is not too great, but also the
drought is not too great).

**V. 24: That the threshing floors should be full of grain (Et
implebuntur etc.).**

We see that the interpreter himself changed the tenses of the verba. For
now he has translated in the past tense, now in the future tense, so
that our opinion remains, which we expressed above \[v. 18.\], that all
these verba must be read in the conjunctive. But these are all
explanations of the rich promise.

**V. 25. And I will restore to you the years that the locusts\... have
eaten.**

That is, the LORD will abundantly restore to you all that is eaten and
laid waste by the locusts; he will make good the damage that you have
suffered, and he will do so sufficiently.

**Who were my great army (Fortitudo mea magna).**

Here it is the same word \[XXX\]virtus, which has been translated above
\[v. 22.\] by the word *virtus* \[power\]. 2) I take it in the
accusative, although I do not care how you may take it, if you only take
the right

1\) The last sentence reads in Dietrich: kulollro sutem Mißsrieorüias
äivins\" ists\" irndres äieuntur. The error, \"ists\" instead of isti
(the latter is offered by the Jenaer), caused the old translator to give
it thus: \"Es wird aber gar schön diese göttliche Barmherzigkeit ein
Regen genennet.\"

2\) From here to the end of this section Dietrich: I like that Jerome
refers it to the locusts or an enemy army, so that the opinion is: iene
locusts and beetles, which were my army, gleichwre also the Greeks call
the armies ovva/rekx. But he saws so:

The prophet is saying that he does not understand what the prophet is
referring to here. But he says thus: I will give you my power, that is,
I will send my exceedingly rich fortune among you, that you may have
abundance of all things, and this will be my great power; namely, that
we do not refer the power (fortitudinem \[\"army\"\]) to the locusts,
but to the divine blessing. This Jerome did not do, but referred it to
the locusts, therefore he blathered.

V. 26. **And my people shall no more (non in sempiternum**) be put to
**shame.**

This way of speaking is used by all prophets, also Moses used it, and
the words are as if this generation of the Jews will last forever and be
glorious; but this is not the opinion. For in sempiternum or in aeternum
\[forever\] indicates an uncertain time 3). And it is wholly the
opinion, as if he said, \"And my people shall be put to shame no more.\"
We see the same thing frequently in Scripture. So it is also in the
books of Kings \[2 Kings 6:23\] and everywhere else. Incidentally, what
we read:

V. 27. \[**And none more.\]**

Et non est amplius should be read according to the Hebrew: And there is
no other besides me. And so far he prophesied about the temporal
destruction of the people: everything would collapse if they did not
repent, as they did not repent; but God would restore everything if they
repented, they would have abundance of all things, the fullness and the
fullness. Thus the prophet indicates the mercy and goodness of God, who
is much more pleased that the sinner should live and repent than that he
should die.

Cap. 3, 1. **And after this I will pour out my spirit.**

Here begins the right prophecy, which must be completely separated from
the preceding. But it is treated by Peter

3\) Dietrich: a limited time, however lasting and long. - The following
is then missing except for the last, transitional words.

1454 L. XXV. SS-S7. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI. 2I1S-21IS.
1455

Apost. 2, 17. ff. First of all, the transition that the prophet makes
here must be mentioned; if it is not understood, the readers of the
prophets are very offended by it. For this is the way of the prophets,
when they have proclaimed their prophecy, for which they were sent, they
leave off what has happened in the meantime after the revelation of the
prophecy, and immediately continue in this way, prophesying about
Christ. For although all prophets are sent to proclaim some temporal
punishment, they have always added something about Christ. The same
thing was done here by the prophet Joel, who immediately passes from the
people of the Jews to the future people of Christ by omitting everything
that happened after the proclamation of the prophecy of the desolation
of the whole people of Israel 1). Therefore he begins here a completely
new prophecy, 2) and that in such a way: since he says \"after this\",
it is not to be referred to the desolation of the Assyrians, but this is
the way of the prophets, that they omit some histories which have
happened, and continue by proclaiming other things which lie in the
distant future. For long after this revelation of the Holy Spirit
happened, of which he prophesies here.

**I will pour out my spirit on all flesh.**

In two ways the Holy Spirit is poured out: by a manifest vision or
revelation and by secret inspiration. Now here he is talking about the
Holy Spirit who is obviously poured out and revealed and confirmed by
visible signs. 3) He lets off here,

1\) Dietrich: of the people by the Assyrian.

2\) Here Dietrich continues to the end of the paragraph in such a way:
Therefore the little word \"after this\" is not \*) to refer to the
desolation of the Assyrians or the order of the things, but simply to
the order of the time that this will follow, that however will precede.

3\) Here Dietrich goes on like this: that is, from the revelation which
happened on the day of Pentecost. First of all, however, it must be
noted here that the prophet is proclaiming the law, the kingdom and the
ancient people, which was divided into certain tribes and orders. In the

\*) This \"not\" (of) is missing in the Erlangen and Weimar editions,
but in the Jena edition it is there. Even if the \"von\" is missing in
the eäilio yiiQveps, the newer editors could recognize just as well as
the Jena edition \"from the context\" that it was only a printing error.
The Weimar one added this note: \"says Dietrich against Luther\" 2c.

To speak of the ancient synagogue of the Jews and of the people of the
synagogue, which had certain kings and princes appointed by God, a
certain order of Levites appointed by Moses, who held the teaching
office. There was a certain prestige of persons. But it is far
different, says the prophet, in that new people, there will be no
respect of persons. For the authority to teach and to preach will be
given to everyone, not by a man nor from a man, but by God, from above
(divinitus). There will not be any class, as in the ancient people of
the people, with whom alone the priestly office is to be, but the Holy
Spirit will be poured out on all flesh, all will be teachers and priests
of God. And therefore it was most necessary that this kingdom, which is
completely different from the former one, should be established and
confirmed by manifest signs and by the public revelation or outpouring
of the Spirit, since the secret revelation was also in the synagogue.
Here are the passages that are read here and there in the prophets and
in the writings of the apostles, when Jeremiah says \[Jer. 31, 33. f.\]:
\"I will put a law in their hearts, and write it in their minds; and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God. For they shall all
know me, both small and great.\" Likewise in Isaiah, Cap. 54, 13: \"All
thy children will I make learned of the LORD.\" Joh. 6, 45.: \"They
shall all be taught of GOD\" 2c. And this is fulfilled on the day of
Pentecost. After the gospel was revealed and made known through the
apostles to all the ends of the earth - for so it was prophesied in the
Psalms - these signs immediately ceased, because now there is no longer
any doubt about the truth of the gospel, which was confirmed at that
time by such obvious and visible signs as were necessary when that
preaching was still new. Therefore, we should no longer require signs to
confirm the word that was already given before.

In the tribe of Judah the princes were warm, in the tribe of Levi the
priests, who were in the public teaching office. The prophet first
abolishes this difference and says that it will be far different in the
new people: there will be no respectability.

[1456 L. LXV. 97-100. interpretation of Joel (1.), Cap. 3, 1. W. VI,
2IIS-21IS. 1457]{.underline}

is so clearly affirmed and presented to the world. The signs that God
gives, He does not give for the sake of one man, but for the benefit of
many, as the apostle Paul says to the Corinthians \[1 Cor. 12, 7.\]:
\"In each one the gifts of the Spirit are manifested for the common
benefit.\" You do not need the revelation of the Spirit, but others.
That is therefore fool\'s work, what our prophets in our times invent
from their signs. Therefore this prophecy of Joel deals with the fact
that the Holy Spirit should be revealed publicly. For always, from the
beginning of the world, the Holy Spirit has been in the godly, which
cannot be denied, but he has not been revealed publicly 1).

**Over all meat.**

2\) That outpouring of the Spirit did take place on all flesh, but the
gift itself did not take place in the same way. For the whole world saw
that manifestation of the Holy Spirit in the apostles when they taught
and preached the gospel. But the gift did not come to all. For in like
manner speaketh Isaias \[Cap. 40, 5. 52, 10.\], \"All flesh shall see
the salvation of our God.\" And Simeon in his song \[Luc. 2, 31.\],
\"Thy Savior, whom thou hast prepared before all nations.\" That is,
Christ is prepared, he is revealed, he is set forth that all flesh
should look upon him. 3) And so in the New Testament the Holy Spirit is
poured out into the hearts of the faithful, and yet also made known by
the clearest signs, for the confirmation of the word. Therefore it is
nothing that our prophets want to take from this text a protection for
their error, since they say that they have the Holy Spirit and that
everyone must feel the Holy Spirit: but they have not yet revealed the
Spirit. To these one must answer thus: it is not enough that one has the
Spirit as an infused one, since this is only of use to you alone, but it
must be proven that the Spirit has been infused.

1\) Dietrich: publicly so abundant.

2\) Dietrich begins thus: Some interpret this passage in such a way, and
not badly, that the outpouring 2c.

3\) Dietrich: to wait for him (expsotaiutus instead of: spsotarmus).

and the outpouring of the Spirit must be made manifest and publicly
known so that all flesh may see it. Since our prophets 4) do not do
this, as they will never be able to do it, let them remain students of
the holy Scriptures with us, since we now have no other revelation of
the Holy Spirit than the holy Scriptures, and let them not bring up a
new way of teaching, which they pretend to do on the impulse (auctore)
of the Holy Spirit. For when Christ introduces a new way of preaching,
he will not do it in darkness, or in the heart of one or two men, but he
will make it known by a manifest sign, so that there can be no doubt
about it, which he really did when he publicly announced this new
kingdom that is prophesied about here. Peter also boasts of this when he
says \[1 Petr. 1, 12.\]: \"Through the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven\"
rc. 5)

**And your sons and daughters shall prophesy.**

This is what I have said above: In this kingdom there will be no
difference of persons, there will not be only prophets, priests and
Levites, as before, but without difference both sons and daughters will
prophesy and teach. Here he sets three kinds of divine enlightenment:
first, \"prophecy,\" which is where the mystery of Christ is clearly and
roundly announced, or the grace that has been shown to the world through
Christ, as when Jeremiah \[Cap. 31, 33.\] says, \"I will put my law in
their hearts,\" and when Paul or the other Apo-

4\) \"Our prophets\" is missing in Dietrich.

\- 5) Dietrich adds the following: However, although this opinion is not
bad, it is not the actual opinion of this passage, but a somewhat
violent explanation (eataokresis quasäam). Therefore, we will take it
more simply that the prophet meant to indicate that there would be no
distinction of persons, but that God would pour out the Holy Spirit on
all flesh, that is, on all believers, in whatever place, in whatever
situation, in whatever condition they might be, First, he indicates that
the priesthood will be abolished in this way, and then he announces that
sinners and those who are flesh will be promised the Holy Spirit, that
is, the forgiveness of sins by grace, free of charge.

[1458 L. xxv. ioa-102. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. su8-siro.
1459]{.underline}

The first is the clear interpretation of the Scriptures; this
interpretation is prophecy. Secondly, \"dreams\" are when certain images
are created, but understood through the interpretation of the Spirit, so
that those who have seen them do not doubt that they are from God.
Third, \"visions\" are certain appearances, as when Joel saw the locusts
and caterpillars and beetles, when Isaiah \[Cap. 6, 1. ff.\] saw the
glory of the Lord over the temple 2c.

Cap. 3:2 **I will also pour out my spirit on both servants and
maidservants at the same time.**

The pronoun meos \[in the Vulgate: meos servos\] is not in the Hebrew.
But the opinion is as if he wanted to say: Now there is a difference,
that there are servants and maidservants. 1) But I will let the same
cease, for the servants and the handmaids also shall be prophets. This
passage is an exceedingly clear testimony against the Papist pretended
(larval) priesthood, in which they do not want to let anyone be a
priest, but in which there is a respect of persons. But Christ says that
all his faithful will be priests. For what does the priesthood require
other than the proclamation of the works and the Word of God? No one can
deny that this is granted to all Christians, since Christ is a priest
without any subordination.

1\) Dietrich leaves what now follows in this section and puts for it:
Now they are the lowest class of this people and the most contemptible
part of the commonwealth. I will now choose what is foolish and poor in
the sight of the world, and make that also servants and maids shall be
prophets. This passage serves admirably against the vain papist
pretense, namely against that arrogance in which the \"papist\" priests
prefer themselves to the common Christian state. For what is said here,
that God will anoint the servants and maids with His Spirit, is a much
more excellent and better anointing than that of the bishops. However,
this must not be understood as if we were rejecting the office of
teaching and governing in the church. For this is necessary, and order
must be kept that there be certain people who do this, lest disorder
arise. But still this office does not make them better people than the
rest of the faithful are. For they have not for this reason another
Christ, another baptism, another sacrament. And though the office is
with certain persons, yet Christ calls all his faithful priests, who are
to pray, to exercise the word for themselves and their brethren, and to
offer their bodies by the cross, which is the sacrifice of praise. These
proper duties of a priest are for everyone who is baptized.

The Holy Spirit will be given to the sons and daughters, to the
menservants and maidservants 2c.

Cap. 3, 3. **and will give miraculous signs in heaven.**

That means: I will give my spirit in such a way that I will confirm it
with the clearest and most solid testimonies, namely with signs, so that
nobody can doubt it. And with this text we will endure our prophets for
a long time. 2) We will not believe their spirit if they do not also
perform obvious signs and wonders to confirm the presence of the spirit,
3) which will never happen. Therefore, God has given these miraculous
signs in heaven and on earth in order to announce His new kingdom to the
world, in that all creatures testify to it, for God does not play games
or act in darkness when He wants to proclaim a new word. So we know also
at the proclamation of the law, with how great miracles and even
terrifying signs he confirmed it, namely with fire, smoke, thunderclaps,
hail, tremendously strong sound of the trumpets 2c. All this, as well as
what he prophesies here, happened so that the consciences would be made
sure that they could not doubt in any way, but would be made completely
sure that it was the word of God which 4) they heard. And so the opinion
is, as if he wanted to say: \"Let heaven and earth be moved\", when the
gospel

2\) Dietrich: let us see our prophets become ashamed, for 2c.

st) Dietrich instead of: \"which will never happen\": whom they praise
so.

4\) Here the Altenburg manuscript, not as well as Dietrich, which offers
ouoä, has äs quo. - From here to towards the end of this paragraph
Dietnch: But in the preaching of the gospel such a showing of signs and
wonders, and such pomp, was still more needful, not only because the
law, which was given by God through Moses, was abolished with all
worship, of which they had such great and glorious promises, but also
because such great things were performed by lowly and despised men, whom
all the people would oppose, and especially those who were the highest
among the people. Therefore the prophet says: \"In order that you may
believe the new sermon and the poor fishermen, I will cause the heavens
and the earth to be moved and new miraculous signs to be performed in
great numbers. But the false prophets do no true miracles, because God
2c.

1460 **k. XXV, 102-ios.** Interpretation of Joel (1.), cap. 3, 3-5. **W.
VI, 2120-2124.** 1461

The prophets will not do this to the false prophets, since God will not
testify against his word, which has been proven once and for all by so
many miracles. He will not do this to the false prophets, since God will
not testify against His word, which has been proven once and for all to
the world through many miracles.

**Namely, blood, fire and smoke vapor.**

I do not know for sure where all these signs happened, nor do I know for
sure if it is written that all of them happened.

**Fire.**

This is undoubtedly because the fire came from heaven and the tongues of
the apostles on the day of Pentecost were seen to be cut as if they were
fire, as Lucas writes in the Book of Acts \[Cap. 2, 3\], where it is
likely that there was also smoke. By this sign the Holy Spirit made
Himself known not only here, but also afterwards, as it is written in
Acts 10:44: \"The Holy Spirit fell upon all who heard the word.\" No one
denies that this happened visibly, since it follows immediately \[v.
45.\], \"The believers of the circumcision were astonished.\" Therefore
it is probable that the Holy Spirit also then manifested Himself by
fire, as Peter says \[v. 47\]: \"These have received the Holy Ghost,
even as we also.\"

**Blood.**

I do not know if he speaks in the same way and takes \"blood\" as in the
following verse. Because I would like to interpret \"blood\" here as
Nöthe, which the Hebrew word permits. Thus it is written in Gen. 49,
\...: \"He shall wash his robe in the blood of grapes.\" And Deut.
32:14: \"And he shall water it with the blood of good grapes,\" that is,
with reddish wine of the choicest grapes. I believe that it also has
this meaning here (although I am not quite sure of it). For that one
would take the blood of Christ and the martyrs, which is poured out on
the earth, for this sign, as some do, seems to me to be too bold and
forced. Whoever wants to refer these signs to the last day of judgment
may do so without my having anything against it,

as Christ also prophesied Luc. 21, 1) 11. about the signs that should
come before the day of judgment. But I would simply like it to refer to
the time when the Holy Spirit was sent, namely that all these signs
accompanied the sending of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost, and
that \"the great day\" was the day of the revelation of the gospel. For
we know that at the time of Christ\'s passion the sun was darkened, and
there may have been many other signs, but they are not written by the
evangelists.

Cap. 3, 4. The **moon shall be turned into blood.**

This is a Hebrew way of speaking; that is, he shall become bloody, he
shall become like blood, and in the Revelation of John \[Cap. 6, 12.\]
is the same way of speaking: \"The sun became black as sackcloth of
hair, and the moon became like blood.\" For the Hebrews use the
substantives instead of the adjectives. But what we read:

**The terrible day of the Lord (Dies Domini horribilis),**

Instead, according to the Hebrew, it is more correctly read: whom one
should fear, whom one should hold in reverence (metuendus, reverendus).
Thus God is often called \"terrible\" (horribilis) in Scripture, and
since Jacob says in the first book of Moses \[Cap. 28, 17.\]: \"How holy
(terribilis) is this place!\" it is the same word that has been
translated here by the interpreter by \"terrible\" (borribiliZ).

Cap. 3:5 **And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved.**

This text has moved me to understand all these signs from the day of the
revelation of the Gospel, which is very venerable and great. Have not
the godly from the beginning of the world called upon the name of the
Lord? Yes, indeed. But again, one must refer it to the public
manifestation \[of the invocation\]. It is im-

1\) In the Latin editions: Lues\" 19.

1462 L. xxv, Ion-log. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2124-2127.
1463

The same faith of the godly, \"they drank from the spiritual rock\", as
Paul says in 1 Cor. 10, 4, but nevertheless under the law and the fear
and under that ministry was hidden what has now been made known at the
time of the revealed gospel. Paul treated this passage with great
respect in his letter to the Romans, Cap. 10, 13. ff. For in this
passage stands the summa of our blessedness. Quite simply, as the words
read, it must be understood without adding any strange glosses: \"He
shall be saved,\" that is, he shall be redeemed from sin, from death and
from hell, he shall pass from the misery of this life into eternal life;
this blessedness cannot come from anywhere else than from the Holy
Spirit, who is poured out on all flesh, and who causes the name of the
Lord to be invoked. In short, what is said here is the same as what Paul
urges everywhere, namely, that man may be justified without the works of
the law, through faith. For \"to call\" is to believe, as Paul
interpreted it in a very beautiful sequence of steps in the Epistle to
the Romans, Cap. 10, 14. f.: \"But how shall they call on Him in whom
they do not believe? But how shall they believe?\" 2c. In this sequence
of steps he has summarized in the shortest possible way the whole way in
which we become blessed. First of all, it is necessary that some are
sent to preach the gospel. This sending is followed by hearing, hearing
is followed by faith, faith is followed by calling, calling is followed
by salvation. Thus the Christian kingdom is nothing other than a kingdom
of faith in the word of God, namely that blessedness is not granted to
us by our powers, not by our merits or righteousness, but by the mercy
of God out of grace freely, who even loved us, as the apostle says in
the letter to the Romans \[Cap. 5, 10 .\], \"while we were still
enemies,\" who sent the Holy Spirit into our hearts, who works the
invocation of the divine name, by which alone we are to be saved 2c. And
expressly he said, \"The name of the Lord.\" For we cannot see the Lord
face to face in this life.

but here is the kingdom of faith, 1) until we die; then we will know the
Lord face to face 2c. Summa Summarum: Our salvation lies solely in
calling upon the mercy of God and desiring it, as the Psalms are full of
such passages \[Ps. 6, 5\]: \"Lord, help me for the sake of your
goodness. Likewise \[Ps. 79:9\]: \"Forgive us our sins for your name\'s
sake.\"

**For in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there will be salvation re.**

This is what Isaiah says \[Cap. 2, 3\]: \"From Zion shall go forth the
law, and from Jerusalem the word of the Lord.\" And Christ says Luc. 24,
46. f.: \"Thus it is written, and thus Christ had to suffer, and to rise
from the dead on the third day, and to preach repentance and remission
of sins in his name among all nations, and to raise it up at Jerusalem.
\"2c. Therefore, also here is one of the passages which contains that
the Gospel will first go out from Jerusalem, which Christ undoubtedly
opened to his disciples, along with many others. Here, behold the
wonderful goodness of God, who willed that our consciences should be so
assured that they could in no way doubt the word of God, that even in
the first announcement of the Gospel He made use of a certain place,
certain persons, and also outward, certain signs, which were-

1\) Instead of the few words that still follow in this sentence,
Dietrich has: For we have our goods only in the name, that is, in the
word of GOD, which we hear. We have nothing more from God until we die;
then we will see the Lord face to face 2c. But special attention must be
paid to the unlimited word \"who\" (quiounyue - whoever), for he
excludes no one from the blessedness that he promises freely to those
who call upon him. But it is useful to know this, because of the
dangerous thought of the mistake, which the gentlemen invent for
themselves without the word of God, yes, against the word. For first, in
this and similar sayings, the word and mercy of God is offered to all in
general. Then the servants of the Word also have the command to forgive
the sins of each individual. With this decree of God we should be
satisfied, unv believe, because God sends us His word, we are the people
who are provided. Then, according to this promise, we should also call
and be sure of our blessedness, which he so clearly promises us. Summa
Summarum 2c.

[1464 **L. XXV, 108-110.** interpretation of Joel (1.), Cap. 3, 5-7.
**W. VI, 2127-2130.** 1465]{.underline}

This was highly necessary at that time, so that the first proclamation
of the Gospel could be shown and testified by clear signs and places and
persons. \"Thus God is hostile to the flying spirits, who bring forth
everything so uncertainly. But now that the Gospel has been proclaimed,
it is no longer bound to any persons or places, as follows immediately:

**Also with the others whom the Lord will call.**

As if he wanted to say: Jerusalem will be the beginning of salvation,
the gospel to salvation will be preached there first of all, but it will
not only remain there, it will also reach the Gentiles and be preached
everywhere in the whole world; after that there will be no difference
neither of places nor of persons. 1)

1\) Here Dietrich has added: But that he points to the Gentiles is
clear, because he speaks of those who are to be called first. The Jews
were already called before.

**The third chapter.**

I am uncertain 2) where this chapter is to be drawn, whether to what
follows or to what precedes. I, in my opinion, relate it to the kingdom
of Christ, and think that it is an interpretation of the previous text,
namely, how the matter in the world goes forward, that the kingdom of
Christ spreads further. Summa Summarum, as I said in the beginning, this
prophet is one of the oldest who prophesied at the time when the affairs
of the Jews were extremely prosperous, and at that time he saw the very
bitter hatred and persecutions of the Edomites, the Philistines, the
Moabites and the other Gentiles against the Israelites, whom God had
chosen as his people, as the sacred stories show. And therefore the
prophet speaks in this way: Well, the godless nations may rage and set
themselves against the people of God, 3) the time will come, it will
happen one day, that all this defiance of the enemies of the people of
God will be taken away. I will avenge this dishonor that has been done
to my people again in a quite exceptional way, but in such a way that my
vengeance will be salutary. For I will send them the word of the gospel,
so that they will recognize their error and their sin, and I will make
friends of those who

2\) Dietrich: One doubts.

3\) Instead of nävSrsÄntur should probably be read adversentur; Dietrich
has omitted it.

4\) that in this way he refers the present raging of the enemies to the
day of Christ, of which he prophesies.

**V. 6: When I turn the prison of Judah and Jerusalem.**

He foresees that the Jews were to be led away into captivity. Therefore
this is to be referred to the kingdom of Christ, as if he wanted to say:
When I will redeem my people Judah from the right captivity of death,
namely sin and hell, when I will have risen from the dead and given the
Holy Spirit,

**V. 7. I will bring all the Gentiles together.**

This never happened bodily. How could it happen that he would gather all
the Gentiles into such a narrow place? For the valley of Jehoshaphat,
which is between Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives, is very narrow, so
that it can hardly contain a few. And therefore I cannot agree with
those who refer this passage to the last judgment, namely that the Lord
will sit in judgment in the Valley of Jehoshaphat and judge all the
Gentiles there. When we say to them how narrow the place is, they refer
it to the whole region that surrounds

4\) Here Dietrich inserts: But they that are stiff-necked, and will not
suffer the word, they shall perish;

1466 D. XXV, 11O-113. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2130-2133.
1467

Jerusalem lies around. As much as they always say the same thing, they
are mistaken, because the whole world could hardly contain the
innumerable multitude of all the people who have ever lived from the
beginning of the world, let alone Judea, since some will be in the
earth, others will fly in the clouds, as Paul describes \[1 Thess. 4,
16. f.\]. Therefore this passage, because inconsistency compels it, must
be drawn on the secret interpretation (mysterium), for the literal mind
(litera) cannot stand. We want to understand it from the preaching of
the Gospel, which gathers all the Gentiles and calls them to judgment,
announces to them their error 1) and judges them that they are
condemned, and shows them Christ as salvation. And this has happened and
is still happening from day to day, from the day the Holy Spirit was
sent from heaven, of which he said above in the second chapter \[Cap. 3,
1.\], so that they, thus called to judgment, might recognize their sin
and ask for forgiveness. For Jehoshaphat is by no means a generic name
(substantivum=appellativum), but a proper name, and so the prophet uses
the proper name in a different meaning and makes of it a generic name,
as also Hosea did, since he took the name of the city Gilead for the
synagogue. 2) In short, the prophet speaks of the conversion of all
Gentiles to the church of God through the gospel.

**And will settle with them there.**

From the present evil he passes to the future vengeance, as if he wanted
to say: It will happen one day, it will happen, when I will judge, then
they will not escape; I will also judge them, \"I will find them fine\",
as much as I close my eyes now to their inhuman cruelty, with which they
rage and rage against my people. Therefore he takes the whole number of
the heathens and all nations, and yet he also understands that part of
the adversaries of the people of God.

1\) Dietrich: terrorem instead of: errorem.

2\) Here Dietrich inserts the words: But Jehoshaphat means the valley of
judgment. It is the same thing that Christ says Joh. 16, 8: \"The Holy
Spirit will punish the world for sin\" 2c. Therefore the prophet speaks
2c.

**V. 8. and have given the boys for food, and the maidens for wine sold
and drunk (Et posuerunt puerum in prostibulo et puellam vendiderunt
etc.).**

It is to be wondered what may have come into the mind of Jerome, that he
has gossiped here after his manner of the Gentiles. XXX means in Hebrew
a whore and an innkeeper or guest. And therefore some think not without
reason that the harlot Rahab was an innkeeper; and it is very probable
that the scouts sent by the Israelites had stayed in a respectable inn.
3) Since now the same word stands here, which means both a whore and an
innkeeper, then it can be understood also in twofold way. It seems clear
to me that this is the opinion: 4) They have put the boy like a whore or
like an innkeeper 5) and the girl to the wine, that is, that she is a
servant at the wine, just as the young man, that he is a servant in the
inn. I like this opinion better than to refer it to unchastity, since
they used the people who were taken away as servants and maids.

V. 9 **And you of Zor and Zidon and all the border of the Philistines,
what have you to do with me?**

It is the same opinion that I have stated above. He again indicates the
present evil, that he postpones the vengeance until the time of the
revelation of the gospel, as if he wanted to say: You are vehemently
hostile to my people, but 6) what you have taken from them, you have
taken from me, when there were the gold and silver vessels of the temple
and other things; I will repay you again on your head. But this has not
the

3\) Instead of: \"it is very probable\" Dietrich puts: \"it seems\", and
adds here: \"But the New Testament calls her twice \[Hebr. 11, 31. and
Jac. 2, 25.\] a harlot.\" The Weimar edition did not note this addition
by Dietrich.

4\) Instead of what follows in this paragraph, Dietrich puts: They sold
their boys for food and their girls for wine, that is, they sold them
for a small price and in a shameful way.

5\) Instead of crauponam, it should probably read \"auponera, which is
what the Zwickau manuscript offers here.

6\) Dietrich: seä; our template: et.

4468 L. xxv. **113-iis.** Interpretation of Joel (1.), Cap. 3, 9. 10.
12. 13. w. vi. **2133-2136.** 44ßA

Opinion, that the Jews should hope a bodily revenge, which they take at
their enemies, as the miserable people still boast today. Therefore the
opinion is: What would you also do to me, you Philistines, and your
borders? Do you want to take revenge on me when you take revenge on
yourselves? As if he wanted to say: \"Just lift\", you will have to pay
for it. 1)

**Hurry.**

Namely, when the gospel comes, I will make enemies out of those who are
now enemies. I will make friends of them and thus take revenge on you.
2)

**V. 10. My beautiful jewels.**

The Hebrew reads: Desiderabilia mea bona, that is, the golden and silver
vessels of the temple.

**Did you take (Rapuistis). 3)**

Namely, when the people were led into captivity. The neighboring
Gentiles took pleasure in the misfortune of the Jews, because they were
led away singing, which the sacred stories testify, and as it is
described in the Psalm \[Ps. 137, 7.\]: \"Pure off, pure off, to their
ground.\" Here 4) I refer everything to Christ, not, like Jerome and
others, to the Babylonian captivity. Otherwise, we could never
understand each other from the context, nor would it rhyme with each
other in any other way.

**V. 12. Behold, I will raise them up out of the place.**

Everything must be related to the revelation of the Gospel, because if
the prophet had described some simple fight or revenge, he would not
have used so many and strong words, as we also have

1\) Dietrich adds: I will judge you by the word, I will punish your sins
and send you my gospel for salvation. But if you do not accept it, you
will suffer terrible punishments for despising grace and will be
afflicted in the same way as you afflicted my people.

2\) This section is missing in Dietrich.

3\) Here, it seems to us that not everything is in order with the
keywords, because rapumtis does not stand here in the text of the
Vulgate, will therefore probably only be regarded as a gloss to
tuliktis, which the text offers. The old translator has put here the
11th verse as keyword.

4\) Instead of them, which does not seem to make sense to us, we have
adopted Uio.

See below how great he has made the matter. So this awakening is to be
understood by the preaching of the gospel, which has reached not only
the Jews but also the whole world.

**V.13. And will sell your sons and your daughters again by the children
of Judah.**

This Hebrew way of speaking \[in in manibus filiorum\] is rendered by
the Latin by the preposition xor, by the Germans by the word \"durch\",
since the Hebrew language does not have the preposition \"through\". So
it is everywhere in the Prophets: Verbum Domini in manu Esaiae etc.
\[Isa. 20, 2.\], that is, per manus, which the Lord had preached through
Isaiah 2c. And here in manibus is as much as per manus, that is, through
the children of Judah. This was done through the apostles, who,
preaching the gospel, went to all nations 5).

**They should sell them to those in Imperial Arabia (Sabaeis).**

The land of Sheba is farther from Jerusalem than the Greeks are from the
Philistines. It is Arabia; for the histories say of a threefold: Arabia,
the stony, the desert, and the happy. In the stony Arabia are the
Edomites, the Ammonites, the Ishmaelites 2c. The largest area is
certainly the stony Arabia (Petraea) in which Petra is the capital. The
fortunate one lies towards India, on the upper shore of the Red Sea. And
this the Hebrews call XXX. It is written about the Queen of Sheba in the
Books of Kings \[1 Kings 10:1\] and also in the Gospel \[Matthew
12:42\]. According to the figure of the synecdoche (which is usual with
the prophet) he now calls the Arabs instead of all distant Gentiles. And
so he understands a spiritual selling, that they were made Christians
and became Christians through the whole world.

**For the LORD has spoken it.**

This he added to confirm his prophecy, as if to say: All this

5\) Here Dietrich continues thus: came, and to the faithful were a cause
of blessedness, but to those who did not believe, a cause of
destruction. For God does not suffer the contempt of His word.

4470 L. xxv, iis-us. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 2136-2138.
4474

will not fail, because it was not man who foretold it, but the Lord who
spoke it, who cannot lie.

V. 14: **Proclaim this among the Gentiles.**

Namely, what we have said \"calls it out\". But this happens through the
gospel, which is a calling voice. This whole passage and everything that
follows is full of figurative speeches, just as all the prophets are
full of figurative speeches. This can be seen as an example in this
verse of Psalm \[Ps. 118. 22.\]: \"The stone which the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone.\" This passage must be understood by Christ,
since Christ and all the apostles \[Matth. 21, 42. Apost. 4, 11.\]
interpret it in such a way that it is he in whom both the Gentiles and
the Jews must be united, in whom alone there is salvation, but he was
rejected by the builders, that is, by the scribes and Pharisees. So also
Isaiah says \[Cap. 28, 16.\], \"Behold, I lay in Zion a foundation
stone, a corner stone. \"2c. This passage is also said of Christ, but
yet the words do not seem to contain this at all, but what follows
interprets the figurative speech \[Rom. 9:33.\], \"He that believeth on
him shall not be put to shame.\" This One Word throws light on the whole
figurative speech. It is very important that this be observed by the
prophets, who for this reason make use of so many figurative sayings, so
that they either cover up the prophecy or exercise their perspicacity.
We see the same here in Joel. For the opinion of this passage is this,
as if he wanted to say: You who preach the gospel, continue to proclaim
it, make it known to all nations, arm yourselves for war, awaken the
strong, let all the men of war come and go up, here shall all be present
who are fit for war.

**V. 15. Make your plowshares into swords.**

These are just images. For the prophet is so rich in spirit and makes
this spiritual battle so great, which would not have been so necessary
in the description of a physical battle.

would be. 1) But the summa is this: Take the word and fight bravely. The
plow and the sickle are the tools of peace, the spear and the sword are
the tools of war, and so the opinion is: These things, which you used
before for peace, use now for war and strife. This is what Christ says
\[Luc. 22, 36.\], \"He that hath two garments, let him sell the one, and
buy a sword.\" But Isaiah has just the opposite, who Cap. 2, 4. thus
says, \"They shall make their swords into plowshares, and their spears
into pruning hooks.\" But both are right. For the latter speaks of the
physical and spiritual peace that began under Christ, but Joel speaks of
the spiritual battle of the word of the gospel.

**The weak speak: I am strong.**

This actually refers to the Christians, 2) so that it cannot be
understood as a bodily struggle, because as Paul says \[Rom. 5, 3.\]:
\"We also boast of tribulations\", and although the Christians are weak,
powerless and rejected, they are still exceedingly strong. Paul teaches
this beautifully everywhere: \"As those who have nothing, yet have
everything\", 2 Cor. 6, 10. Likewise 1 Cor. 4, 13. 11.: \"We are always
as a curse of the world, and a purgatory of all people. We suffer hunger
and thirst, and are naked, and are beaten,\" 2c., just as Christ also
said of himself \[Luc. 9, 58.\], \"The Son of man hath not where to lay
his head.\" Admittedly splendid men of war, who thus lie under all
misery! It is also a wonderful war, and quite contrary to all the ways
of the whole world, since the

1\) From here to the end of this section Dietrich offers the following:
But some take this passage in such a way that the opinion is: Seize the
word and fight bravely. The plow and the sickle are tools of peace,
spears and swords are valuable tools of war, so that it should sem the
same thing that Christ says fLuc. 22, 36.\]: \"He that hath two
garments, let him sell the one, and buy a sword.\" But I do not approve
of this opinion, and rather think that it indicates the future
persecution of the Gospel, so that these words: Announce a war, awaken
the strong, are taken narratively, as words by which the heathen
encourage each other to resist the Gospel, as in the second Psalm a
similar raging of the heathen against the Gospel is predicted.

2\) Dietrich begins this section thus: Those who follow the former view
relate this to Christians, for as Paul says 2c.

[1472 **L. XXV, 118-120.** interpretation of Joel (I.), cap. 3, 15-19.
**W. VI, 2138-1241.** 1473]{.underline}

Men of war are weak, that is, incapable, who suffer many things, who are
rejected. But Paul interpreted this war service, since he says \[2 Cor.
10, 4.\]: \"The weapons of our knighthood are not carnal\" 2c. 1)

**V. 16. Gather yourselves together and come here, all the Gentiles.**

2\) \"Your strong ones,\" that is, your mighty ones. For all the nations
of the whole world will be stirred up by the gospel. And yet the prophet
speaks, as it were, to the Philistines alone, since he says, \"Thy
mighty ones.\" But by the figure of the synecdoche he comprehends with
the Philistines all that there are of the Gentiles, all of whom he has
slain by the spirit of his mouth, and subdued them to himself by the
gospel.

**V. 17. The Gentiles will make up their minds and come up.**

It is impossible, as I said above, that the Valley of Jehoshaphat could
contain all the Gentiles, even if it were so large, which it is not. But
it is to be understood of the church, in which all will be gathered
under the word of God. For just as the sun illuminates the whole world
with its rays, so all men are gathered together under the word of God;
even though not all believe the word, it is nevertheless proclaimed both
to the ungodly and to the godly. To these it is a power of God for
salvation, to those it is judgment.

**To judge all the Gentiles.**

I draw all this to the day of the revealed gospel and to the whole time
of the new Zion, not to the day of the last judgment.

**V. 18. Strike the sickle, for the harvest is ripe.**

1\) Dietrich adds: Let each one follow which opinion he wants; I take it
so that the prophet wanted to indicate the enormous raging of the
Gentiles against the gospel by this picture.

2\) Instead of this passage, Dietrich offers: \"He has certainly
depicted the raging of Satan and the world, as well as the cross and the
persecution of the true church. For the number of the godly is so small
that the whole world seems to have conspired against the gospel.

These are all exhortations to preach the word diligently. But all of
them are figurative speeches, as if he wanted to say: Begin to preach
and continue diligently: Since the harvest is now, the appropriate time
has come. So Christ also says John 4:35: \"Look into the field, for it
is already white for harvest\" 2c.

**Come down, for the winepress is full, and the winepress overflows.**

For this is the correct reading according to the Hebrew. And now follows
the interpretation of all these things.

**For their wickedness is great.**

Here he clearly interpreted what he wanted to indicate with the
winepress, the harvest, the threshing floor, namely the whole world, in
which the grapes are pressed and the wine is available in abundance.
This is also how Isaiah used it \[Isa. 63, 3\]: \"I tread the winepress
alone, and there is no one among the nations with me\" 2c. Thus by the
word he has trodden all nations under his kingdom, whether they will or
no. Those who are unwilling are judged and condemned; those who are
willing repent after they have been judged, 3) and recognize grace;
through the recognized grace they become blessed, since faith is nothing
other than the right knowledge of the goodness and mercy of God, or the
face of God, as the prophets speak. Thus, these passages are all sermons
about the power and might of the Word of God.

**V. 19. There will be heaps of people here and there in the valley of
judgment** (**in valle concisionis**).

XXXX in Hebrew means a great multitude. And here the prophet has used it
in the plural, as if to say, many multitudes of people. Multitudes,
multitudes, wherever you turn, multitudes are seen. Therefore, this can
by no means be understood by the Jewish people alone, since all this is
described so abundantly and with exceedingly clear words, as I also
reminded above. \"The valley of judgment\" (vallem concisionis) he calls
the

3\) In our Vorläge: juäieatl; in the Jenaer: juäieari.

1474 L- xxv, 120-122.Ausleaunaen about the prophets. W. vi, 2141-2141.
1475

Valley of Jehoshaphat. This word in Hebrew is the one that Paul
translated in the letter to the Romans Cap. 9, 28: \"The LORD will do a
steur on earth\" (verbum breviatum faciet Dominus super terram). But it
actually means: certainly to circumscribe, to abbreviate and, as we say:
\"to put into a nutshell\". So here: in a circumscribed, certain and
limited valley. Our \[Latin\] interpreter did not translate this well by
the word concisio. For the Latin does not call concisum that which is
circumscribed or certain and briefly summarized, but that which is
divided and cut into many pieces. This word was also used by Daniel in
the description of the Antichrist \[Dan. 7, 1) 12.\]: \"For the time and
hour was determined for them, how long each should last.\" This valley
is now the church of Christ, as I said above.

V. 20. **Sun and moon are darkened.**

We have also explained this above in the second chapter. For this is how
the prophets describe the matter, that not only the sun and the moon,
but also the stars and all creatures seem to be repugnant to those whom
the Lord terrifies and whom he wants to deliver into the hands of the
enemies. So also in the book of the judges \[Cap. 5, 20.\] it is written
about Sissera: \"From heaven they fought against her, the stars in their
heats fought against Sissera\" 2c. For so it seems to the wicked, as if
all creatures resisted them. That is to say: From the very fierce
warfare and the many beatings and runnings together a smoke rises up
that one cannot even see the sky. This is also known to those who have
once practiced this difficult trade of warfare, that it seems to those
who are defeated as if all creatures were standing against them, which
is also the fear of the

1\) Here, only the Erlanger has correct in the margin: van. VII. In the
Jena translation in the margin: van. 12; in the Weimar translation in
the margin: Dan. 12, 9; in the old translation: Dan. 9, 26. The correct
determination of the passage has its special difficulty here, because
the word Dan. 7, 12 is not found, but only Dan. 9, 26, but in a
different meaning. However, the citation given in our text according to
the Vulgate puts it beyond all doubt that we have correctly identified
the passage.

death, which is in front of their eyes. But here the prophet has taken
the image of a bodily defeat to indicate the greatness and fierceness of
the spiritual war, to which Paul also alludes in the Epistle to the
Romans, Cap. 1, 18: \"God\'s wrath is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.\"

**V. 21. And the LORD will roar out of Zion.**

This is the interpretation of all that he has so gloriously foreshadowed
about this battle. Here he describes the weapons of this war, but, he
says, no sword, not any weapons will be in this war, but the Lord alone
will direct this battle by the word. This passage can certainly not be
understood from an external battle, but it must be understood from the
spiritual battle. As if he wanted to say: Here will be such an attack
that the Lord will roar from heaven by sending the Holy Spirit, that is,
he will frighten all nations by his word, which he will let be heard,
and will let it go out first from Jerusalem. This is what he said above
at the end of the second chapter \[Cap. 3, 5.\], \"For in mount Zion and
in Jerusalem shall be salvation.\" See what we said there.

**That heaven and earth will shake.**

So also Haggai says in the second chapter, v. 7: \"There is yet a little
while, that I will move heaven and earth, and the sea and the dry land\"
2c. For when Christ was born, the angels were heard, and they appeared
with the announcement that Christ was born, and all creatures, the stars
and the heavens bore witness to his birth.

**But the LORD will be a refuge for his people.**

Here the prophet again clearly explains what kind of war this will be,
namely a spiritual one, that Christ will reign in his people, that is
the believers, who would believe in him. And so he will be the
confidence of his people; for it is more properly translated by fiducia
\[than by spes in the Vulgate\]. Therefore, in

1476 **L. XXV, I22-I2S.** Interpretation of Joel (1.), Cap. 3, 21-24.
**W. VI, 2144-2147.** 1477

In this kingdom all human powers, all swords will cease; everything will
be done in faith. 1) And then, says the Lord, \"you shall know that I
the Lord your God dwell in Zion.

**V. 22. Then Jerusalem will be holy 2c.**

This promise has never been fulfilled in a bodily way, but through
Christ or the kingdom of Christ it has been fulfilled in this way.
Jerusalem was not called holy because holy people were there, but
because of the holy Word of God that reigned there. After Christ was
taken up again into heaven, they desecrated this word and left it
standing, therefore that sanctification ceased. 2) Therefore it must be
understood of the spiritual Jerusalem, of the church of Christ, which is
sanctified and purified by the word.

**V. 23: At that time the mountains will be dripping with sweet wine.**

For so it is said in the Hebrew \[namely mustum, instead of dulcedinem
in the Vulgate\^. You stand again that they are all figurative speeches.
He speaks of such a kingdom of Christ that when it has begun, everywhere
on the mountains will be the sweetest must, that is, in all places the
exceedingly sweet promise of the gospel will be preached, which is sweet
as must.

**And the hills will flow with milk.**

This is the same thing. Through these two things, both the strong and
the little children will be refreshed. \[The Word\] will conform to the
spiritual gifts of all men. So also the apostle Paul interpreted
\"milk,\" 1 Cor. 3:2. So the sweetness of the word is indicated.

**And all the brooks in Judah will go full of water.**

It indicates the abundant presence of the Word or the course of the Word
of GOD.

1\) Here Dietrich makes this addition: But this is one of the most
distinguished passages, which describes the right worship, which will be
in the New Testament.

2\) Dietrich adds: and the fleshly Jerusalem was destroyed.

**And there shall go forth a fountain from the house of the LORD, and it
shall water the river Sittim.**

In Hebrew it says: And will water the valley of Sittim. Sittim is a
place on the other side of the Jordan, where the children of Israel
lived after the death of Moses \[Deut. 34, 8.\], not 3) far from the
dead sea towards the east. Therefore the meaning is: From the house of
the Lord towards the east a beautiful spring will rise (because he looks
at the location of the temple and the door of the temple), which will
also flow outside the borders of Israel, that is, to the Gentiles. By
this image he indicates the course of the Gospel through the whole
world, because according to the figure of the synecdoche he designates
by \"Sittim\" all peoples of the world outside Judea, as if he wanted to
say: So great will be the abundance of the Word of God that it will not
only be preached to the Jews, but also to all Gentiles, as all the
prophets have it.

V. 24. **But Egypt shall become desolate.**

This is the conclusion in which he briefly repeats the power of the war,
which he described so abundantly and with such glorious words, as if to
say: When all this will happen, Egypt will be desolate and Edom will be
a desert. But this is a strange desolation by sweet wine and milk and a
spring. Should not weapons and a great number of men of war be needed
here? But, as I have said, it must all be taken spiritually, for it
indicates the power and effectiveness of the Word of God. Thus also
Jacob describes the kingdom of Christ, Gen. 49, 12: \"His eyes are
redder than wine, and his teeth whiter than milk.\" A wonderful king,
and in the eyes of the flesh a soft and womanly king, as also the 45th
Psalm praises him because of his beauty, and also describes Christ\'s
kingdom in the most beautiful way. He says \[v. 5. according to the
Vulgate\]: \"Apply yourself to

3\) This non is missing in the Erlangen as well as in the Weimar
edition. According to Deut. 34, 1. the territory of the Moabites is
\"over against Jericho\". Therefore the Jenaer offers rightly: non
prooni, and in the Zwickauer manuscript stands at the correspondirenden
place: non ionM. A deviating reading of Dietrich is not noted.

1478 **L. XXV, 125. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2147 f.**
1479

with thy ornaments and with thy beauty, go forth happy, and reign.\" 1)
Thus the prophets describe the kingdom of Christ, and what this beauty
of Christ is, the Spirit adds in the Psalm \[v. 3.\], \"Blessed are thy
lips,\" 2c. indicating the sweetness of the evangelical word.

**V. 26. And I will not leave their blood unscented. 2)**

1\) In the Vulgate, this verse reads: Lpseistuaet pulvüi\'ituüins tun
intunüu, prospurs xrousüs, st rvAuu. In both the Erlangen and Weimar
editions, there is only a comma in this sentence, before inteocis. In
both editions, instead of proeeüs.

2\) In the Vulgate: Ht munüado kauAuineni eoruru, qusru from
inuuüuverum, to which the interpretation obviously refers. However, both
in the Altenburg manuscript and in Dietrich (which the Erlangen and the

That means: Those who were not cleansed before the preaching of the
gospel shall now all be cleansed, \"because the law could not make
anything perfect\", as Paul says \[Hebr. 7, 19\]. But the gospel, this
new preaching, will cleanse all and bring them to perfection if they
believe. For it proclaims that Christ is our righteousness, wisdom,
redemption, and sanctification 3) \[1 Cor. 1:30.\] Blessed be He
forever. Amen. 4)

Weimar edition) is found from v. 25. the wrong keyword: 3uckniii
aeternum ünlütaditur.

3\) Instead of katistsotioneria in the editions we have assumed
kauotiüoationtzru, which is undoubtedly to be read according to the
Vulgate.

4\) At the end there is the note: IVittsraderAas in xroketzto
I\^aursutii (August 9) HXXXIIII.

**2. D. Martin Luther\'s Interpretation of the Prophet Joel**

in Veit Dietrich\'s second adaptation.\*)

Outgoing 1547.

Newly translated from Latin.

**M. Bert Dietrich\'s letter.**

> To the most honorable Mr. Friedrich Bernbeck, a relative of the town
> council of Kitzingen, his esteemed friend.

I hereby send E. E. the sermons of the holy prophet Joel, with our
venerable father and teacher, D. Martin Luther\'s, interpretations,
which, according to my habit, 5) I have taken from

5\) The Erlangen and the Weimar editions give the words of Dietrich nwo
mors a, as we think, very spiteful interpretation. Based on various
arbitrariness, which Dietrich admittedly allowed himself several times
when publishing Luther\'s writings, the Weimar edition, Vol. XIII, p.
XXX says: \"In the end, he had a right to speak of this kind of writing,
IN60 mors\", i.e. he thought that it was his right to do what he had
been doing for so long, namely to act as an interpolator of Luther\'s
writings. That this is not the opinion of the words, however, can
already be seen from this preface, still more clearly

whose lections I have compiled. It is a small and minor gift, insofar as
it consists of paper; even more verlicher, however, from the preface of
the \"Songs in the Higher Choir\", where he (Walch, St. Louis Edition,
Vol. IV, 1746) says: \"Therefore I hope that those who love pure
doctrine and are concerned about the welfare of the church will approve
this work of mine, which I have now spent many years on, so that what
Luther taught publicly in the school could also be seen, read, and known
by those who have never seen Wittenberg, the highly blessed workshop of
theology and all good studies.\" The Weimar edition goes too far in its
zeal against Dietrich and therefore, blinded by prejudice, has also
occasionally erred. .\]. B. Vol. XIII, p. 108 it makes the remark (last
line of the page): \"says D [against]{.underline} Luther\" 2c. For in
the passage cited, it is a simple printing error, which the Jena edition
has recognized and improved, a non has dropped out. Compare in this
volume Col. 1454, note 2.

\*) Already in the first note to the third interpretation of the prophet
Hosea, and again with the preceding writing, we have pronounced that
Luther had read only once about the minor prophets, namely in the years
1524 to 1526. Therefore it is to be assumed that also with this writing
Veit Dietrich no other

1480Interpretation of Joel (2.), B. Dietrich\'s letter. W. vi,
2143-215.\" 1481

I would hate to be guided by the judgments of the world and its perverse
nature, which, now that it is in the process of its downfall, as it
were, is more vehemently opposed to the Holy Spirit than ever before.
But you will, according to your godliness, read this with the same heart
with which I have published it. For what better thing can we do in these
corrupt times than to immerse ourselves completely in reading and
contemplating the prophets of God? We are in the same danger with them.
They saw that the contempt of religion and idolatry would certainly
bring about the change of their whole kingdom. As for us today, that I
do not say anything about the adversaries who wage war with Christ and
his word without ceasing, we do not at all refrain from usury,
fornication, gluttony, pomp, arrogance, etc., even though we are
reminded by the kind Father in heaven by very severe chastisements and
plagues. And with these so great sins we also associate the contempt of
religion, and do not apply that diligence at all, which we should show
for the preservation of the church doctrine in an exceptional and very
careful way. But just as the godly cannot look upon this decline of
religion and the perverse nature of the world without great sorrow, for
they see that misfortune will come in heaps and turn everything around,
so it has its special benefit,

that in order to alleviate this distress, one should go back to those
dangers of the people in the Old Testament and pay attention to what the
Holy Spirit has reminded through the prophets.

Joel now exhorts to repentance, to diligent invocation of God; he
recites the most lovely sayings about the mercy of God, so that,
although the majority of the people are taught in vain (for they
inordinately indulge in the lusts of the flesh), the godly may lead
their lives with all the greater care and pay attention to the word,
which as a light, even in the darkness of death, shows the straight path
to eternal life. If we now step onto this path of life and remain on it,
we will easily overcome all danger and misfortune. When I look at the
excellent sermon in the second chapter of Joel, in which we are very
clearly told what the will of the Lord is, that he be gracious,
merciful, slow to anger, and kind, that he will also be sorry for the
misfortune he has thought of, then all fear and distress, which the sad
idea of future wrath arouses, immediately disappears from my mind and
before my eyes.

For although we take the common misfortune, and especially the
frightening senselessness or blindness of the world, to heart, it is
certain that our Joel, along with the other prophets of his time,
suffered the same fate.

The author\'s work is based on the fact that he had more material to
work with than the material he had already used in his previous work.
Therefore, we need not bother here with speculations about the time of
the lectures, as Seckendorf does in his List. I\^utk., lib. Ill, p. 669,
Z138, who concludes from the mention of the propositions of the
theologians at Louvain, which appeared at the end of 1544, and the
Council of Trent, which began in 1545 (December 13), that these lectures
were given in 1545. But in the interpretation of the first chapter, v.
4, it is even told of a plague of locusts that took place in 1546, that
is, after Luther\'s death, and Cap. 3, 2. is reported about the fiery
glow that the sun had for three whole days in 1547, before the Elector
of Saxony was captured by Emperor Carl. Therefore it can hardly be
subject to a doubt that these things were added by Dietrich, together
with many other accessories. However, this edition agrees more with the
previous writing than his edition of 1536, which we have assigned to the
notes in its deviations, e.g. the locusts 2c. in the first chapter are
no longer taken allegorically from the enemies of Israel, but
historically; and the like more. The Weimar edition says: \^The grossest
violence of 1536 is now withdrawn.\" \"Dietrich made true what he held
out in prospect in the letter to Menius of September 30, 1539: to revise
once more the three prophets edited in 1536 \[namely, Joel, Amos, and
Obadiah\]. Admittedly, this undertaking extended only to Joel.\" Our
writing first appeared under the title: Joel propheta, cum commentariis
reverendi et sanctae memoriae viri D. Martini Lutheri. Nunc primum
aeditus per Vitum Theodorum Noribergensem. Impressus Norimbergae in
officina loannis Montani et Ulrici Neuber. Anno M.D.XLVII. octav. A
second edition followed in 1548 under the same title. Both editions are
provided with Veit Dietrich\'s letter to Friedrich Bernbeck, Rathsherrn
in Kitzingen, dated August 28, 1547. Walch has recorded the same and we
also reproduce it, improved after the Latin Wittenberg edition. In 1553,
a German translation appeared under the title: \"Der Prophet Joel durch
Doct. Wart. L. read and interpreted in Latin, and newly interpreted,
etc.. With a preface by Mr. Niclas von Amsdorff. 1553.\" At the end of
the book: \"Gedruckt zu Ihena, durch Christian Rödinger.\" In the
collective editions: Latin in the Wittenberg (1552), toin. IV, col. 481
with Dietrich\'s attribution; in the Jena (1570), tom. IV, kok 764 0
without the attribution unv likewise in the Erlanger, tom. XXV, p. 139.
German in the Wittenberger (1556), vol. VIII, p. 347k without the
attribution; likewise in the Altenburger, vol. VI, p. 919 (but
erroneously with the year 1536); in the Leipziger, vol. VIIK p. 184,
which first brought Dietrich\'s attribution in German. But only Walch
has included Amsdorf\'s preface. We have translated this writing anew,
because the old translation of the anonymous from 1553 is immensely
prolix.

1482Explanations on the Prophets, W. vi. eiso-si-m. 1483

They have not only taught the majority of the people in vain, but have
also endured hatred, beatings, and even death with confident courage.
But they soothed this bitter and sensitive pain with divine promises,
which the world, according to its custom, laughed at. The prophets,
however, knew that they were certain. Thus, even though the world
persecutes the word, even though it ridicules, even condemns and
blasphemes our doctrine, which alone, as I have said, shows the way to
eternal life, we too, I say, should hold on to this comfort, that there
is still another life, in which God will indeed let happen to the
faithful what He now promises through the word.

Thus you see, my dear Frederick, that the sacred office of preaching has
two rewards; one from the world, which, according to its custom, opposes
the word, blasphemes it, and kills not only the godly ministers of the
word, but in the ministers themselves the Son of God. And we must not
suppose that this happened only among the people of the Old Testament,
of whom many dream that among them the knowledge of the true religion
was very obscure and was understood only by the teachers or prophets
themselves, but Christ, the Son of God Himself, told His Church and
proclaimed beforehand that it would happen that it would be attacked,
that those who raged against it would think that they were doing God a
service. But not even the papists will say that the teaching of the New
Testament is not clear and distinct. Why then does one rage and rage
against those who do nothing but maintain the purity of the teaching of
the church? Therefore this is the habit of the world at all times, that
it opposes the word, that it makes itself the judge of the word, and
rages against those who prefer the word to human wisdom. Whoever does
not want to have this reward of the world, will indeed completely
renounce both the public teaching office of the Gospel of Christ, and
the painstaking, difficult and dangerous work of writing, which until
now, from time to time, learned men in Germany have taken upon
themselves for the propagation and preservation of the true teaching.

But, dear Frederick, let us turn away our eyes and thoughts, yes, ears
and heart, a little from this low, ungrateful, highly

I add, of this lying, bloodthirsty and godless guest, who has always
dealt with the messengers of the Son of God in such a shameful way, yes,
who killed before times, and in our times still does not cease to kill
the Son of God, who is poor and despised, in whom there is no form nor
beauty, who is taken for the one who is smitten by God \[Is. 53, 2.
ff.\], to whom, even as he hangs on the cross and suffers the pains of
death in his flesh, one mockingly cries out \[Matth. 27, 40.\]: If he is
the Son of God, let him come down from the cross and help himself; and
that I say with one word, which the Son of God himself used \[Matth. 11,
6.\], all who despise, reject and condemn Christ as a nuisance. On the
other hand, we want to hear the Son of God and at least give him a
hearing with one ear, if we consider him unworthy that both ears, both
eyes and the heart itself should be open to him always and at all times.
How eagerly, how carefully, how fatherly he praises us for the care of
his word by taking upon himself the teaching office even in this life!
How diligently he proclaims to us beforehand all the dangers that the
confessors of his word have to expect! He says \[John 15:20\]: \"The
disciple is not above his master; if they have heard me, they will hear
you also. But let us look back to the Pharisees and Sadducees, to the
Levites and chief priests, and there will be no doubt left in our minds
as to the hearing Christ had among these people. For these were the only
ones who threw the innocent lamb to the devilish wolves, Pilate and
Herod. But after having been killed by them, he returned to life, an
eternal and divine life (Dei vitam). What has he bequeathed to his
Church again but his word, and the most exact care for it? \"Go ye,\"
saith he \[Matt. 28:19\], \"teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.\" What else
do we hear here but of the ministry of the Word? Nothing of the masses,
nothing of the monastic state, nothing of the adoration of the images,
nothing of the intercessions of the saints, nothing of indulgences,
nothing of all the other things that the Roman Pontiff imposes on his
servants. But what kind of rewards does Christ assign to this ministry
of preaching, which has no rewards to expect from the world? Certainly
this: \"He who believes and is baptized shall be saved\" \[Marc. 16,
16\]. Des-

1484Interpretation of Joel (2.), V. Dietrich\'s letter. W. vi,
2153-2156. 1485

resemble what Paul \[Apost. 2, 21.\] quotes from the prophet Joel: \"He
that shall call upon the name of the LORD shall be saved.\" Likewise
\[Luc. 22, 30.\], \"Ye shall sit in my kingdom, judging the twelve
generations of Israel.\" Likewise \[1 Cor. 1:30.\], \"Christ is made
unto us of the Father wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption.\" What godly person would despise these rewards? Who would
not rather forsake life, riches, honorary offices, and all the goods of
this life, than be stuck with the wretched world in constant errors of
death, be tormented by his sins, endure the eternal tyranny of Satan,
and be forsaken by the Holy Spirit, as the faithful and almighty
governor? These rewards, which are only in the church of Christ, where
his word is preached, we also want to look at, each in his state, and
not let the judgments of the world turn us away from the confession of
the salvific doctrine.

I remember when the blessed Luther came ten years ago to the meeting
that was set up because of the Augsburg Confession, in order to
strengthen it with the testimonies of both the Holy Scriptures and the
church fathers, and he had fallen into a very dangerous illness, which
the long, rough and arduous journey had caused; 1) nevertheless, on the
advice of the physicians, though almost half dead, he set out on his
way, and, if it would please God so, he would gladly die in the lands of
his dear prince. After he had climbed onto the wagon, he raised his
hands in the air, blessed us, and said goodbye to us, who surrounded him
in large crowds.

1\) The same history in Mathesius in the eleventh sermon. Compare
Mathesius, Luthers Leben, St. Louis edition, p. 194, but there it says:
\"bis in den elften Tag\".

stood. His last words were these: May the Lord fill you with his
blessing and with hatred against the pope! He also sent a servant to
tell D. Brück that he wished him all the best, but especially that he
might get to know the pope as he knew him, for then it would happen that
he would also, after his example, hate him very much. Luther, however,
did not begrudge the pope and his followers their riches and worldly
honor, but he condemned his stubborn efforts to suppress religion and
pure doctrine, and the certain danger of the offspring, which he saw so
long before, was in his mind. This evil, however, is best countered by
the simple and godly interpretation of the holy scriptures. And this was
also the reason why I published the prophet Joel.

But, dearest Frederick, I wanted to put your name in front, because I
know that you have great zeal for the true religion. I therefore wish
that my good will may please you and that you may diligently care for
the church. You will not be able to render God a more pleasant and
posterity a more useful service than this. I am now working diligently
on the interpretation of the first book of Moses, although I am always
indisposed, and the eighteenth chapter is now almost finished. This I
have deemed necessary. I thought it necessary to report it to you
because your cousin, Philipp Bernbeck, my dearest friend, has often
written to me on your behalf about it. Be well with your spouse, and the
valuable guests, my neighbors, who are staying with you now. Greet D.
Georg Vogler, your brother-in-law. Camerarius and Roting, our good
friends, send you their regards. Given on the Sunday after Bartholomew
\[August 28\] Anno 1547.

Your

Veit Dietrich.

**Preface to the Prophet Joel, by Nicolaus von Amsdorf.\*)**

Anno 1553.

In these last days it is very useful and good, indeed highly necessary,
that we diligently read, preach and practice the dear prophets. For
since the same two ordinary regiments, spiritual and temporal, the kings
and the high priests, together with

the mighty and rich wards of the people, were raised up and sent by God
to punish them, because they had departed from God\'s word and the right
worship, and had set up and established their own chosen worship,

\*This preface by Amsdorf is not found in the other complete editions of
Luther\'s writings; only Walch has included it after the first single
German edition, which was published by Christian Rödinger in Jena in
1553.

1486Expositions on the Prophets. W. vi, 2is6-sisg. 1487

Moreover, because of their insatiable avarice and selfishness, they
oppressed, scraped and suppressed the poor, so that they had hardly
enough to eat, and now such great, gross and cruel sins have become so
common in the world that they are no longer counted as sins, nor are
they respected, and even defended and excused, so the prophets are just
as useful and necessary for us to read now as they were for the Jews at
that time.

For we see before our eyes that we despise God\'s word and His servants,
the poor preachers, as the Jews despise their prophets, give nothing to
them, do not ask for their punishment, but live all according to our
heart\'s desire, and do everything that pleases us, God be angry or
laugh.

We see before our eyes that the three sins, avarice and selfishness,
gluttony and fornication, anger and vengefulness, have become so rampant
that no improvement can be hoped for. Everyone lives without all fear
and timidity, yes, always continues his pleasure in all kinds of sins,
and will neither tolerate nor suffer any punishment, so that we are now
and at this time as stiff-necked as the Jews were ever warm.

But because among the great multitude there are always some devout
hearts that love and fear God and His word, God sends His prophets and
preachers for their sake, to punish, admonish and teach, so that His
elect may be kept by His word and right faith.

That is why God has now, in this terrible and last time of ours, sent
this prophet Joel, together with the others, through his chosen armor,
Doctor Martinum, of holy memory, so that he may graciously save and
preserve his flock, which he still has in this world, from the future
punishment that is at the door.

For as Joel threatens the Jews and announces to them God\'s wrath and
punishment, namely the future Babylonian prison, and thereby exhorts and
reminds them to repentance and prayer, so that the godly may be
preserved and saved in the future punishment:

So we should also let ourselves be moved by him to repentance and
prayer, so that in the future punishment, which will come upon Germany
out of God\'s wrath, we will remain with God\'s word and be preserved in
the right faith, so that we will not perish and perish eternally with
the world.

But how such things are obtained is clearly and plainly shown by the
prophet Joel, when he says, \"Whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved,\" or blessed. This saying

Each one may read for himself in the Prophet and in the interpretation
of Doctoris Martini, Holy Memory, in which he will find that all, and
only those who call on the name of the Lord in right faith, will be
saved, and in the future punishment, as children of God, will be
preserved and saved.

For whoever calls upon God in earnest and asks for forgiveness of sin
trusts and believes in God; But he who trusts and believes in God
repents, repents and forsakes sins, becomes a child of God and a servant
of righteousness, free and rid of sins, of the curse and eternal death,
which is the right and true freedom of the children of God, to do what
pleases and pleases God, and to forsake those things which offend Him
and He has forbidden.

For to do according to the lust of the flesh as we please and as seems
good to us is sin against God and his word, an eternal prison, and not
freedom. For he who sins is the servant of sins, the devil\'s own and a
prisoner, as Christ and Paul clearly say in their Gospel. And again,
whoever serves God and is obedient to His word and His servants, as a
faithful, pious servant, is truly free, for the Son of God has made him
free through His Spirit; but whoever lives according to his will, as the
world does now, is imprisoned by the devil, so that he must die and
remain in sins forever.

Whoever now wants to be done away with such a prison and be free, let
him think, as the prophet Joel teaches here, that he should repent, that
is, improve himself and renounce sins, call upon God, and ask for mercy
or forgiveness of sins; for this is the right repentance: so the future
punishment, which will pass over Germany, and is now already at the
door, will not harm him, and also perhaps be saved here for a time.

Therefore I ask and admonish all believers in Christ, who boast and
accept God\'s word, through the mercy of God, that they read this
prophet with its interpretation diligently, form and grasp it in their
hearts, and learn from it to trust and believe in God, to love and fear
Him above all things, so that the terrible punishment, sorrow and misery
that exists may be alleviated.

And it is especially necessary to beware of all human traditions and new
teachings that are now rising up and coming forth, namely, the
adiaphorists, who by their new mass and Leipzig order have certainly
denied Christ and His Word. For it is nothing different, if one

1488 Interpretation of Joel (2.), Amsdorf\'s preface. **W.** vi,
**2159-2163.** 1489

long looks, because a comparison with the antichristian measuring
monkeys.

On the other hand, there now comes forth a blasphemer, named
Stenkenfeld, 1) who writes and shouts that God\'s Word is our idol;
which is the greatest blasphemy that ever came upon the earth; for the
Word is God, and God is the Word, so how can it be an idol? If one
trusts and believes him, then one trusts and believes the right one God,
not the voice of man, but the word, as the core, which is stuffed into
the voice of man, as into a shell; which the coarse ass does not
understand at all, yet pretends, his word, and what he teaches, shall be
spirit and life; but Christ\'s word shall be the dead letter; just as
Storch, and his prophet Marcus, also taught and preached, without
danger, thirty years ago. Is this not cruel and frightening to hear?

But what the Osiandrists pretend is a pure will of courage, and their
own poem, for they have not one saying in the whole Scripture, so that
they could prove the new invented article of their faith, that the
essential righteousness of God should be our righteousness.

For the two proverbs Jeremiah 23:5, 6, \[and\] 33:15, 16, which they
lead, speak of the seed of David, that the same, because it is Jehovah,
is our righteousness; and they shall never be able to prove or prove any
thing more or otherwise out of it: this I know for a fact.

But we have for us clear, bright sayings from the apostle Paul, that we
are justified by the blood of Christ; from this we cannot and will not
depart for the sake of new glosses of human wisdom.

To this now also comes D. George Major, and brings forth again the old
papist saying, \"good works are necessary for salvation,\" which
twenty-five years ago was overthrown and condemned against Doctor
Mensing, preacher monk, and Carmelite monk, called Rothbart, with the
certain saying of Paul Eph. 2, 8. f.: \"For by grace you have been
saved, through faith, and that the same is not of yourselves, it is the
gift of God,

1\) This is: swivel field.

not of works, lest any man should boast.\"

Against this clear saying, George Major stands up, teaches, preaches and
defends the old Pelagian, monastic and papal heresy: Good works are
necessary for salvation; which saying, although it can be glossed over,
because it, according to the nature of the words, is read and understood
by merit, D. Martinus, of holy memory, did not want to tolerate or
suffer it in any way, because Paul, whom he had read, had kept his
opinion. Martinus, of holy memory, did not want to tolerate or suffer it
in any way, because Paul, whom he had read diligently, and who had well
taken, kept and defended his opinion, says in such clear, plain words
\[Eph. 2:8\]: \"By grace you have been saved through faith\" 2c. and
Rom. 3:28: \"We hold that a man is justified without works of the law,
through faith alone\" 2c.

To prevent all this, there is no better means, advice or way, than to
stick to God\'s word, revealed to us through the prophets and apostles,
and to hold fast to it. For we are certain that they are sent by God and
have proclaimed and preached His command to the people.

But what the Osiandrists and Stenckfeldists spout, wash and write is
against the Scriptures, God\'s word and command. Therefore, we are
certain that they are sent by the devil and not by God.

Therefore we should stick to the word and teaching of the prophets and
apostles alone, hold fast to it, and not deviate from it in any way; be
on our guard against all others who teach their own dreams or something
new, even if they perform miracles and signs. For against the confirmed
teaching of Christ, our dear Lord, the prophets and apostles, neither
signs nor wonders are valid, much less the useless, ungodly babble and
spittle of the loose fishermen, who speak and write without Scripture
and God\'s Word, according to their own discretion, by which they only
lead and guide people away from God and His Word to their lies and
fictitious dreams.

But how the prophet Joel fends off, hinders and reproves such things,
each one may read for himself in his following interpretation.

1490 \". xxv, i4i-i4z. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vr, 21S3-2M.
1491

**Interpretation about Joel.**

At what time the prophet Joel preached is therefore uncertain, because
he does not remember in the title of the kings at whose time he lived.
But if the content of his prophecy is diligently examined, then we find
not insignificant indications, which we follow, and want to believe that
he lived after the prophet Isaiah, and that Isaiah was older. First of
all, Joel does not remember the kingdom of Israel, as Hosea and Isaiah
do. Therefore, we consider that the kingdom of Israel had already been
disturbed by the king of Assyria, and the ten tribes had been taken
away, when Joel began to preach. Second, he clearly indicates that he is
speaking of the destruction that would come at the hands of the
Babylonians and the tribe of Judah. For he remembered the house of the
Lord, which alone was at Jerusalem, and said, Let the meat offering and
the drink offering be taken away. Although he does not name any kings,
we assume that he lived in the last days of King Hezekiah or under
Manasseh.

But as far as the content of his sermons is concerned, it is almost the
same as in the prophets Hosea, Amos and Isaiah. For he threatens that
destruction will come at the hands of the king of Babylon, and urgently
exhorts to repentance and prayer. For this is the right place of refuge;
if we flee thither, we shall be preserved, even in the midst of dangers.
Today the Church is in danger in many ways. The godless Mahomedans are
fighting against us with great success, and we are in no less danger
from the pope and his followers. For with this they are going about,
with great effort, after many and various perfidies, that under the
appearance of a council, which is set up to settle the cause of
religion, 1) the kings and princes are arming themselves against our
poor churches, which have rejected the papal idolatry and have accepted
the true doctrine of the Gospel. With these evils, what could the
churches do for a

1\) This also seems to refer already to the Tridentine Conciliar.

What more useful doctrine, or what richer consolation, can be held up
than the sermons of Joel? He exhorts his people most diligently to
repentance. He prescribes the way they should use when praying to God in
such great dangers, he adds excellent consolations of God\'s mercy and
His inexpressible patience or long-suffering.

But because these godly and necessary exhortations were despised by the
people (just as today we almost cry ourselves hoarse, but in vain, that
our people should limit their excessive expenditure, that they should
help the church more generously, that they should beware of annoyances
and by their example also accustom others to the fear of God), the
prophet turns to the holy remnant, which the common misfortune would, as
it were, sweep away at the same time as a great flood of water. He
preaches about the kingdom of God, which is to be spread in the whole
world through the gospel; he teaches about the benefits of Christ, that
he will give the Holy Spirit; he prophesies about new and different
services than those under the law, and says that they will have
different rewards. He says: \"Now those are considered God\'s people who
are circumcised in the flesh, who sacrifice oxen, who offer drink
offerings, but then it will happen that \"whoever calls on the name of
the Lord shall be saved. Finally, he adds the exhortation to all
Gentiles to willingly bow their necks under the gospel, for it will come
to pass that those who do not believe the gospel will be eternally
damned.

This is the summa of Joel\'s sermons, and it has earned him no small
reputation that Peter, in the first sermon of the New Testament \[Acts
2:16 ff\] about Christ, the Son of God, who suffered and rose again,
used the testimony of this prophet against the ungodly slander of the
wicked, who blasphemed the miraculous work of the Holy Spirit.

\'1492 **L. XXV. 143-145.** interpretation of Joel (2nd), cap. 1, I.
**W. VI. 2187-2171.** 1493

Therefore, we also rightly undertake the interpretation of these
sermons, which are so suitable for our times and highly necessary to
comfort the afflicted congregations. May the Son of God, who sits at the
right hand of the Father, also rule us by his Spirit, that we may speak
what is good, and may win the hearts of many people.

that through the reading of this prophet we may be awakened to the fear
of God and learn in these sorrowful times that God is in truth gracious
and merciful, patient and of great kindness, repentant even of the evil
which He has planned for us because of our sins. Amen.

**The first chapter.**

**V. 1. This is the word of the Lord that came to Joel the son of
Pethuel.**

This is a common entrance among the prophets, but much more sublime than
it appears at first sight, namely, that they bring not their thoughts,
not their counsels, but the word of God, which the Lord has spoken, and
in no way can be hindered or changed. Plato praises very finely the
verse of Homer, in which he calls Minos, the lawgiver of the Cretans,
*άοριστην του Δώς,* the hearer of the most high God. But this name we
rightly and in truth attach to the prophets, for they do not bring
forward sayings which they have devised. That which they have heard from
GOD Himself, which the Creator of all things has indicated to them
either by dreams or by visions, this they make known and set forth. But
this is not of earthly and perishable things, as is what the pagans have
to deal with. The prophets awaken the hearts to the fear of God, they
instill confidence in the mercy of God in the hearts, they teach us to
beware of evil and exhort us to obedience; finally, they make known the
way to eternal life, the faith in the Son of God, as true hearers of
God. For the eternal and almighty Spirit of God rules their minds and
tongues. That is why David praises this benefit most highly, since he
also mentions this one after other countless benefits \[Ps. 147, 19.
20.\]: \"He shows Jacob his word, Israel his customs and rights. So he
does not do to a Gentile, nor does he let them know his rights.\" For
this alone is

a gift of the Church that she has teachers who are instructed by the
Spirit of God, who can teach about the will of God and the right
salvation.

Outside the church there are also many excellent minds, but they see
nothing except the light of reason. Therefore, they lack the right
knowledge of God, yes, they do not even know themselves. They are secure
in sins, they certainly despise the judgment of God as long as it is not
yet present, but they do not know at all the way to eternal life. For
either they ridicule immortality as a vain dream, or they see nothing
except the knowledge of the law. If they prove honesty in life and
conduct, they hope to receive reward from God for their diligence in the
future life. This blindness of the human heart is always present outside
the Church, where there are no hearers of God, nor does the voice of God
resound.

But since God had chosen a people for Himself and rejected the godless
pagans who had rejected His word and followed their pretensions, He
granted them for and for this gift, that they had godly teachers
instructed by the Holy Spirit. These exhorted their people to the fear
of God and to faith. For these are the two main parts in which the whole
doctrine of godliness is comprehended. The doctrine of fear includes not
only the exhortation to obey the law of God, but also the punishments.
And here we see the special gift of the prophets. For from God was given

1494 xxv. I4Z-147. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 2171-2175.
1495

He indicated to them, either through dreams or through visions (Deut.
12, 9.), by which people, at what time and in what way God would punish
the sins of His people. This explicit announcement of the punishments
was a special benefit of God, which God granted for the sake of the
elect, firstly, so that they would lead their lives more carefully in
the common dangers and ask God for forgiveness of past sins, and
secondly, so that they would still keep the hope of the future Christ in
the event of a disruption of the rulers, and that this church would
remain, which God had adorned with circumcision and the law. And this is
a great proof of God\'s mercy, long-suffering and patience, that He does
not suddenly attack sinners, but calls them back to the right path
through the Word, and, as Paul says \[Rom. 2, 4\], gives them room for
repentance by announcing to them through His prophets so long beforehand
the future calamity and the punishments of sin.

The doctrine of faith understands the promises of Christ and his
kingdom. Here we also see the special gift of the prophets. For through
the Holy Spirit they knew the person, the ministry, the sufferings and
the glory of Christ or the Messiah, yes, even the time in which he was
to be revealed. But it was most necessary that this doctrine of Christ
should be repeated often and by many, for the people of the Jews had
been afflicted by so many sad accidents that, if the godly had not been
continually raised up by prophecies of Christ, they would easily have
given up all hope of his future kingdom. But the prophets fortified the
hope of the godly by glorious testimonies of Christ, so that in all
dangers they looked to the promised seed and expected eternal blessings
from him. This was the office of the prophets, which was very necessary
in the church or in the people of God.

Today we have the other part of their ministry of Christ and the hope of
eternal glory, which is much more glorious. For what was future for
them, we now see fulfilled through the Son of God. We know that sins are
forgiven through the death of Christ.

The testimony of the Holy Spirit, which falls into the hearts of the
faithful through the word, is also not something small. The other part,
that of the prophetic ministry, which concerned the proclamation of the
future calamity, is less necessary today. For the kingdom of Christ,
which is no longer bound to a certain place, is not threatened by so
many changes of dominion as in those days, but is spread throughout the
whole world. Therefore, if the church is troubled in one part of the
world because of the sins of the people, it flourishes and blossoms in
another part, and every day new offspring grows, and it is further
propagated, as the histories show. We are all waiting for the Son of
God, who will come in the clouds and judge the living and the dead, and
give eternal life to the godly, but eternal punishment to the wicked.
Then we know that those who do not accept the Word will also be
afflicted with bodily punishment. This general prophecy is sufficient
for us today, although we do not know the time and manner of the future
punishments. Nevertheless, even this gift has not been completely
extinguished, and from the time of the apostles there has been a certain
foreknowledge of future things in the church, by which the godly have
been admonished and have led their lives cautiously, expecting the
relief of misfortune from the Father in heaven with certain hope of
salvation. For all such gifts God has granted to the world for the sake
of the Church and the godly.

**(vv. 2-4) Hear this, ye elders, and take heed, all the inhabitants of
the land, whether such a thing was done in your days, or in the days of
your fathers. Tell your children about it, and let your children tell
their children, and their children tell their descendants. Namely, what
the caterpillars leave, that the locusts eat; and what the locusts
leave, that the beetles eat; and what the beetles leave, that the dung
eats.**

**\
**1496 L, xxv, 147-149. interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 1, 2-4. W. vi,
2175-2178. 1497

Almost all commentators, both ancient and modern, hold that this sermon
about the noxious worm is to be interpreted spiritually, and some have
even gone further and claim that the prophet is not merely indicating
the history of a time.

For because different kinds of worms are called, they understand by them
different invasions of foreign nations: among the caterpillars the king
of Assyria, among the beetles the king of Babylon, among the locusts the
descendants of Alexander, among the vermin the Romans. For these
kingdoms have afflicted the people of God severely, until at last,
because of the contempt of the Gospel and the idolatry among the Romans,
it has completely fallen away. If someone wants to accept this opinion,
I will not prevent it. But a careful interpreter will everywhere follow
what is most suitable for each passage. First of all, I am moved by the
reputation of Moses that I think it is historical and not to be taken
according to spiritual interpretation. For so he threatens 5 Mos. 28,
38. f.: \"You will carry out much seed on the field, and collect little,
because the locusts will eat it up. You will plant vineyards and build
them, but you will not drink or read wine, for the worms will devour
it.\" Thus the great quantity of noxious worms, by which the grain
perishes, is ordered as the plague or punishment of sin; then experience
also agrees with Moses. For although this quantity of noxious worms is
in itself a punishment of sin, we see that it is also an indication that
some more severe punishment will follow. In many parts of Germany, in
the year of the Lord 1544, locusts invaded 1) and devastated the fields
far and wide. And in the previous year, that is 1546, they attacked the
regions of Italy near Trent and the part of Saxony bordering on Silesia
in great numbers, and advanced as far as Königsberg in Franconia 2).
Therefore, the devastated fields and the seeds eaten down to the roots
are in themselves punishments of sin.

The old translator offers: \"many innumerable large heaps of unusual
locusts, equal as with monk gray, yellow and black\" 2c.

2\) In Saxe-Coburg-Gotha.

den. But since this was an unusual calamity and had not been heard of
for many centuries, the godly also took it for a sign by which God
wanted to indicate the defeats that would be inflicted by some ungodly
and savage multitude. So also among the Jews, this devastation of the
fields was followed by a very severe devastation by the king of Babylon,
who plagued the land far more severely than this harmful multitude of
worms. Therefore, I believe that this is not allegorical, but that in
fact the unrepentant people were punished not only in one year with
harmful worms, which devoured fields and all fruits and caused famine
and pestilence. This was the first, but still mild and bearable
punishment, which was followed by a more severe one, of which he says
soon after, namely a foreign enemy that devastated everything.

As far as grammar is concerned, as in all languages, also in Hebrew
there is a great diversity of opinions about the actual meanings of the
words. 3) The word is generally translated by caterpillar from the verb
XX, which means to shear off, to gnaw off, and the root word agrees with
this little animal, because it eats herbs and leaves with its teeth.
XXXX is the grasshopper. This has its name from the fact that it swarms
in large numbers.

For when they fly, they fly in such flocks that one might think it was a
cloud, but when they have fallen on the fields, they are bound together,
as it were, so that one cannot set foot anywhere. is translated by
beetles. This animal gets its name from which means to lick. For by
licking it harms. I have translated it quite generally by vermin
(vermis). And there is no doubt, according to several passages of
Scripture, that it is a harmful little animal or worm. But it takes its
name from which means to spoil, to devastate. Jerome about-

3\) The reading äs propriis nonainidus will hardly be correct. We have
assumed propriis si\^niLeationibus noiniopi\".

1498 k. xxv, 149-151. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2178-2181.
1499

It shreds through rubiginem, \"the dew of flour\" that follows a harmful
dew. For when this falls on the leaves and the sun shines on it, it
becomes alive and living, and harms the trees and plants in many ways.

But one would like to say: Why does the prophet commemorate the already
past misfortune? Because he indicates that this had already happened,
and that one had never seen something similar in earlier times. But this
is considered to be the actual office of the prophets, that they teach
about future things, not about past ones. But just this proves the
unbelievable stupor of the people. For although God uses such plagues to
punish the sins of men, how many people, when they suffer such plagues,
are made to feel their sins? who think that God is seriously angry? who
seriously think about putting away their sins? It is truly so, as it is
said in the fable, that men run knowingly and with seeing eyes into
ruin. Since the blindness of our hearts is so great that we do not
recognize the misfortune we feel and suffer, the prophet reproaches the
past misfortune, teaches that it is the punishment of sins, and calls
the people to repentance, as his office requires, admonishing them to
recognize the wrath of God and to be careful to avert it through
righteous fruits of repentance.

Nowadays, we experience more frequently that damage is done to the
fruits. It is not, as it used to be, intervals of years before the
plague rages again; even places where the air is extremely healthy
suffer the plague almost every year. I do not want to say anything about
war cries and other dangers in which we are becoming more and more
entangled from day to day. For in truth we are getting into such times,
the like of which the former times have not seen. But behold, we almost
all find ourselves numbed, as it were, and do not see what we see with
our eyes, what we grasp with our hands, nor do we care about it.
Otherwise, if we seriously believed that this was sent to us by God in
His wrath, and that it was the punishment of our sins, we would not be
able to see it.

we are truly moved in our hearts and intent on repentance. Therefore, it
is not enough that God strikes us, that He sends us various plagues, for
this must be brought to life through the prophetic ministry and brought
before the eyes of the insensate people, otherwise it will happen that
this will not be heeded at all, just as we also despise the benefits, if
we are not awakened by the Word, quite extraordinarily, and do not
believe that they are given to us by the kind Father, and therefore are
also quite careless in their use.

And this is the reason why the prophet says: \"Hear this, you elders,
and take note, all the inhabitants of the land. Tell your children about
it\" 2c. For first of all it is necessary that through the ministry of
the word both the wrath of God and his mercy be impressed upon the
hearts. But this is not enough if it is not supported by the domestic
discipline of the teachers, and the parents diligently inculcate both
the children and their servants at home with what they hear in public or
in the churches from godly teachers. If this diligence is lacking, the
fruit of the public preaching ministry will be little. But if godly
teaching is brought into the individual homes, if these examples of
divine wrath are presented to the youthful age and diligently
inculcated, they will bear manifold fruit of godliness. Therefore, God
demands this care from parents everywhere; He wants the doctrine of
godliness to be propagated, so that the youthful age, deterred by the
examples of wrath, may beware of sins, and, stimulated by the glorious
benefits of God, learn to trust in the mercy of God in all dangers and
to hope for salvation. Just as this care of the parents is certainly
followed by blessing, for children who are raised in the fear of God are
in truth, as Solomon says \[Proverbs 10:1\], the joy of parents, and are
a crown of parents \[Proverbs 17:6\]: so also, where parents throw off
this care and not only do not instruct their children in godliness, but
even corrupt them with adversities, the wrath of God follows with
necessity.

1500 L. xxv, isi-i\[3. interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. I, 2-7. W. vi,
2i8i-2i8s. 1501

God and curse of every kind, which includes both parents and children
according to the saying \[Proverbs 19:13\]: \"A foolish son is his
father\'s heartache. For so (\"fools\") the Scripture calls in a
practicable manner those who have no knowledge of religion or of the
Word, or who do not care for it, as it is, on the contrary, the highest
wisdom if one fears God and pays attention to His Word. In public
sermons, however, godly teachers must often exhort parents to this care
for domestic discipline, and provoke them both by promises and by
threats, as well as by examples and by sayings of the holy Scriptures,
so that they do not fail in their duties in this respect. For this is
truly a planting place of godliness and the main force of discipline, if
in this way the young people are faithfully instructed by their own at
home. And at this point the so determined admonition of the prophet did
not have to be set aside.

V. 5-7 **Wake up, you drunkards, and weep, and howl, all you wine
drinkers, for the must is taken from before your mouths. For a mighty
nation is coming up to my land, without number, with teeth like lions
and molars like lionesses. They lay waste my vineyard, and strike my fig
tree, and flay it, and cast it down, that the branches thereof stand
white.**

Above, he remembered the past punishments and commanded that they be
diligently considered, so that they might thus awaken themselves to
repentance, that is, so that they might recognize their sins and amend
themselves. Now he prophesies of another future and greater evil,
namely, of the Babylonian enemy, who would not only devastate everything
far and wide, but also destroy the worship that the Lord had commanded
to be performed in the temple. It is not by chance that he, when he
threatens that the fields will be devastated by a foreign enemy, does
not address his speech to the idolaters, the adulterers and the miserly,
like Hosea and the other prophets, but to the drunkards. For he
indicates that God will not tolerate drunkenness and revelry.

which sins in general, as we have also seen in Germany at this time,
tend to precede devastation and common misfortune. If you follow the
world\'s judgment, it seems to be something minor if one also drinks a
little too much and gets drunk, and according to your opinion, those who
accumulate treasures in a miserly way, which deceive others, sin more.
For drunkenness is considered to be a sin that affects only one person;
although it has its disadvantages, these are considered to be small
because they affect only one person. Therefore, this sin is not only not
considered a disgrace, but is even desired by all as a kind of
permissible relief from worries and labors. This is how the world
judges.

But if we consider the matter in the right way, we will think that
drunkenness is the greatest sin of all, which brings countless other
sins after it. And also the pagans have seen not only the shame, but
also the immense damage that this evil brings with it. Hence there are
many very honorable sayings in which temperance is praised, but
drunkenness is condemned as an exceedingly harmful ruin. For since
unreasonable animals do not drink more than is required by their nature,
is it not a great shame that man does not know how to keep moderation
and, as it were, lays violent hands on himself? To walk naked before the
eyes of respectable people, to roll around in a pool, to dance, 1) is
not fitting for a man, but it is beastly. But truly, those do no less
against nature who overload nature with intemperate drinking. For they
lose that which is proper to man, the mind, and degenerate into animals.
For all the emotions of drunkards are like those of wild animals. When
they are enraged, their anger is not that of a man, but of a wild
animal, which cannot be appeased in any way; when they get into
merriment (for as natures are different, so also brings the

1\) The old translator offers: \"to jump over tables and benches\"; but
it is also to saltars to add from the preceding \"udurn.

1502 k. XXV, IS3-155. Interpretations about the prophets. W. VI,
2185-2188. 1503

If you look at the people who drink the wine (which produces various
emotions in the mind), you cannot see anything more exuberant; without
any shame they subject themselves to any thing and do it. Therefore, the
pagans rightly detested drunkenness, which in so many ways is contrary
to the nature of man and harms it.

But this is not the main part of this evil. The holy scriptures teach us
about these sins, which the pagans could not see. For thus Christ
preaches \[Luc. 21, 34.\], \"Beware lest your hearts be weighed down
with eating and drinking.\" Paul says \[1 Cor. 6, 10.\], \"Drunkards
shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD.\" Likewise \[Eph. 5:18.\], \"Be
not drunk with wine, from which cometh disorderly living.\" Hosea also
speaks a very serious word \[Cap. 4, 11.\], \"Fornication, wine, and
must make mad.\" Carefully consider these and similar sayings with your
mind, and it will become clear to you not only the exceedingly great
awfulness of this sin, but also the dangers and exceedingly great harm.
For if a physician so strongly admonishes against this vice, because it
weighs down the head, because it heats the body and gives rise to a
thousand diseases: how much more serious is the harm that drunkenness
not only weighs down the heart, but also makes it mad, that is, it takes
away the fear of God, makes the heart secure, inflames desires that
fight against the law of God, takes away the knowledge of God, makes it
unskilled in prayer, and, that I may say it in a word, completely
defiles with filth the image of God that shines in the heart through the
word and faith. From this follow those frightening cases, of which
innumerable examples are daily before our eyes, that on the most trivial
occasions very many 1) perish, many are entangled unawares in the
gravest sins. For it is true what the Greek poet says: *Έμέ&οον ίχανη
πρόφααις εις &δ,μαρτάνειν* \[They became intoxicated; a sufficient
inducement to sin\]. For drunkenness debilitates the soul no less than
the body. Therefore the pernicious enemy, who lays his snares
everywhere, overwhelms the

1\) Erlanger: pluriuni instead of: plui-imi.

drunkards without effort with all the evil he wants. And after that
there remains an even greater evil, namely that, as Paul says, drunkards
will not inherit the kingdom of God. Therefore, we must not only flee
drunkenness, but, as Christ exhorts \[Matt. 26:41\], watch and pray
without ceasing, lest we fall into temptation.

Here you have how the holy scripture preaches about drunkenness. But it
is useful to consider the other damages to the body and goods.
Drunkenness causes sudden 2) and fatal illnesses, makes the body
unskilled even for the smallest works, completely corrupts the mind, and
it happens, as Seneca says, that the infirmities brought on by wine
persist even without 3) the wine. Therefore Pythagoras rightly said that
drunkenness is an exercise in nonsense *(της μανίας μελέτην).* For this
is what happens to drunkards, that they are constantly regarded as being
nonsensical. It is said of Sophocles that he used to punish Aeschylus
because of his constant drunkenness. For although he (he says) writes
good verses, he still deserves no praise, because he does this
ignorantly. For these are his words that are quoted: *Εί χαί δέοντα
ποιεί άλλ\' ουχ εϊδώς γε* \[though he does what is proper, yet he does
not do it with knowledge. For indeed the drunken are like unreasoning
animals without understanding; they cannot bring their minds to consider
important matters seriously. Therefore, when they do something in the
right way, it is more by chance or luck than by diligence, which cannot
exist in drunkards. But this also causes damage to their fortune. For,
as Sirach says, Cap. 19, 1: \"A laborer who likes to get drunk does not
become rich,\" not only because these people generally do not bear the
expenses, but also because they do not have the money to pay for it.

2\) Erlanger: suditas instead of: suditos.

3\) The Erlanger brings in the text sino instead of sins, with a sie! in
the margin. This surely means to take the criticism to the extreme! In
contrast, it is otherwise somewhat weak with the \"\"Es (Lrl. XXV, p.
129), as the last two notes show, which we have made about two errors
occurring on the same page (p. 154).

1504 **L. XXV. 1SS-157.** interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 1, 5-10.
**w. VI. 2188-2191.** 1505

but also because the Lord cannot suffer such a shameful abuse of His
very good and wholesome gift.

It is therefore the blindness, nonsense and godlessness of our people
that they so eagerly seize this evil, which is harmful in many ways, and
also incite others to it in every possible way, taking no account of
their eternal blessedness, none of their bodies and goods, which are
certainly in the utmost danger. But the godly will keep these sayings in
mind, and since they hear from the prophet that the drunkards will be
punished with a bad harvest, they may use the gift of God with
thanksgiving, moderately and soberly, not for indulgence, but for the
body\'s need. In this way, they will not only escape the exceedingly sad
punishments, but also receive certain rewards for their godliness, and
rejoice and be glad in the blessings of God. The others, who despise
these so serious sermons of Christ, the apostles and the prophets, and
follow this nonsensical vice, no one will consider them Christians.

**V. 8-10: \"Howl like a virgin who puts on sackcloth for her
bridegroom. For the grain offering and the drink offering are gone from
the house of the LORD. The grain is spoiled, the wine is miserable, and
the oil is pitiful. The husbandmen see miserably, and the husbandmen
weep for the wheat and for the barley, that nothing can come of the
harvest in the field.**

The opinion is clear, but he enlivens it beautifully, as it were, with
magnificent images. The scripture mentions among the most noble pains
the grief that arises for parents from the death of their children, and
for spouses from the departure of their spouses. And in both cases the
female sex stands in the first place, as the more delicate, the weaker
to bear such a tremendous pain. Thus, at this point, the prophet
compares the people to a girl who, although not yet married, already has
the hope of marriage. And suddenly, the hope is lost.

1\) Erlanger: kolita kadita instead of: Kairita.

taken away, because she sees that the one she loved so much is prevented
by death \[from taking her home\]. This picture fits the matter
exceedingly well. The word does not mean a husband, but a lover, as we
have also said in Hosea, and there is no doubt that this is where the
German word \"Buhle\" and \"buhlen\" came from. The marital alliance was
reserved for the New Testament, in which God, through the mediator
Christ, showed Himself to His Church, as it were, as a bridegroom. The
love, however, or the union that was under the law between God and the
people of the law, was similar to the love that is there before the
wedding. God loved this people, the people also loved God very much, who
did them good in so many ways, and the wedding, that I say so, was in
prospect, because the people grew up, and like a girl who is not yet
manly, became ripe for the husband. But what happens? Before Christ
appears, the people are devastated for their sins and led away captive
by the Babylonians. Whole seventy years it lives in captivity, without
worship, without the paternal laws. Therefore the prophet calls it
howling like a maiden who has lost her beloved and is now completely
deprived of the hope of marriage. For it was difficult to hope for the
return and for the restoration of the previous paternal worship and
customs. Therefore, at the same time, the expectation of Christ, about
whom there were testimonies that he would be born in Judea itself, while
the paternal laws and worship still existed, was in danger; and yet the
godly held on to this hope. But this is what I wanted to remember about
this parable, because it contains an excellent indication of the
difference between the law and the gospel. God also shows Himself kind
and gracious in the law, but this love is nothing compared to the
conjugal love that is shown in the gospel through Christ.

That he says, \"the grain offering and drink offering is gone,\" I also
refer to the great famine and the lack of grain. The \"mourning of the
priests\" means the same. For because they were fed by the tithes, and
did not live from the cultivation of their

1506 L. xxv, 1S7-IS9. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, Asi-siss.
1507

If they had a livelihood like the other tribes, they felt the pressure
of famine before others. But in what he adds: \"Der Wein stehet
jämmerlich\" (mustum erubescit = the must is ashamed), I have been
forced to retain the image, because although it is somewhat, harsh in
our language, it is still very suitable and beautiful. When there is a
great quantity of grapes, the vines are beautifully adorned, and it is
thought that they are, as it were, proud of their bounty, as the poet
says that the meadows laugh when, through the favor of the weather, the
grasses and flowers grow forth. But here the prophet indicates the
opposite, as he says: XXXX XXXXX, the wine has become disgraced, the
vines are disfigured because they are without fruit. And therefore they
are covered with redness of shame, they suffer it unwillingly that one
looks at them, they flee as it were the sight of men 2c. We Germans use
the same image: \"The wine is disgracefully bad\" 2c. This image is
often repeated in this place.

V.11-13. **The husbandmen look miserable, and the vinedressers weep for
the wine and for the barley, because nothing can come of the harvest in
the field. The vine also is pitiful, and the fig tree miserable, and the
pomegranate tree, and the palm tree, and the apple tree, and all the
trees of the field are withered: for the joy of men is turned into
mourning. Gird yourselves and lament, ye priests; hay, ye ministers of
the altar; go in and lie in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God; for it is
both meat offering and drink offering gone from the house of your God.**

It seems as if this long and very wordy appeal to tears and mourning
would be almost idle, because we judge that it happens by nature that
misfortune brings mourning with it. Therefore, it should rather have
been done so that the hearts bowed down by misfortune would be raised
and strengthened. But we must look at what the prophet is dealing with.
For he deals with it, since the desolation of the people by the
Babylonians was already imminent, that he would like to move the people
to repentance. But this is the first stage of repentance, that one
mourns, the

is not sure, knows the wrath of God, fears the judgment of God, mourns
over sin, improves his life 2c. Joel calls for such mourning in this
passage, commanding that one lay aside security, commanding that one
consider the wrath of God and the future punishments that would occur if
there were no improvement in life.

But here you can see the strange perversity of hearts. For the closer
the misfortune is, the safer we are in general. Therefore we give
ourselves over to laughter and joy when tears would be necessary. Look
at Pharaoh: when he was nearest to destruction, he surely mocked Israel
and was eager to slaughter it. But how much more right would he have
acted if he had sighed over his sin, that, having been admonished so
many times, he would not have despised God\'s word, and would have let
go of God\'s people! Nebuchadnezzar, too, since that lamentable calamity
was in store for him, which all kings should have constantly before
their eyes, how secure he was! how pleased he was because of his wealth
and his well-being. The same can be seen in Haman. Since he was closest
to the rope, he was safe for his own sake and thought only of bringing
Mordecai to the gallows. These and similar examples illustrate the
security of human hearts, which is always greatest when destruction is
closest. Thus also Solomon says \[Proverbs 16:18\], \"He that shall go
to the bottom first becometh proud; and proud courage cometh before the
fall.\"

The same thing happened to the people of the Jews. The devastation and
long captivity by the Babylonians was imminent. Even before that, due to
the immense amount of harmful worms, there had been a lack of grain. But
the secure hearts easily forgot the past calamities and were not
concerned about the future ones threatened by the prophet. They lived in
revelry, they made merrymaking, they held splendid parades, as if there
was no danger anywhere and as if they had certainly escaped all
misfortune. That\'s why the enemy attacked them without a care in the
world. We also learn today that

1\) Here we have inserted a non.

1508 **L- XXV. ISS-1S1.** Interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 1, 11-14.
**W. VI. 21S5-2I9S.** 1509

the same. The places that are close to the Turk, that see the enemy as
it were at the door, how nothing they fear! How eagerly they follow the
known and usual pleasures and amusements and keep them! In this way the
world always remains the same. If they are called to repentance, to
sorrow for their sins, to fear the wrath and judgment of God, they will
surely play their games and give themselves up to pleasures. Therefore,
when she is subsequently oppressed by misfortune and beset by dangers,
and now her heart should be uplifted by trust in the mercy of God, there
is no end or measure to her tears, and she falls straight into despair.
Why does she not listen to the godly admonitions of the prophets? Why
does she so surely despise the threats? Therefore, this eloquent
exhortation to tears and sorrow is not idle. It is highly necessary,
although it is almost futile for the majority of people. For they cling
to their security, which is most contrary to true repentance. For the
beginning of repentance is that one recognizes the sin, that one is
frightened by God\'s judgment and stands in fear of the deserved
punishment and is intent on correction, as the prophet 1) will explain
more fully. That he says: \"The joy of the people has become a misery\",
understands in general the theurge of the grain, which is not only
caused by the weather, but even more by the raging of the numerous and
cruel enemy, who devastates and devastates everything far and wide. For
no more pleasant joy can befall the cultivator than when he sees that
his fields are adorned by the blessing of the Lord. But this joy has
completely gone to ruin. Why? Because you have surely lived in sins, not
heeding the godly admonitions of the prophets. In addition to this,
there was the immense abuse of the gifts and innumerable aversions.
These sins deserve this punishment. But it is an even greater punishment
that the foreign enemy also abolishes the divine service.

**V. 14. Sanctify a fast, call the congregation together, assemble the
elders, and**

1\) Erlanger: xroxUetae instead of: propUeta.

**all the inhabitants of the land to the house of the LORD your God and
cry out to the LORD.**

This is the second part of the doctrine of repentance. The Jews had a
different way of fasting than we do. For as all other services are
nothing but hypocrisy, so also fasting. They abstain from meat dishes
and do not take supper, but they have lunch lines prepared most
deliciously from all kinds of fish, and fill their bellies so full that
they can wait for the following day\'s lunch without complaint. Isn\'t
this an excellent service? Among the Jews, fasting was to abstain from
all food and drink throughout the day. Since this is difficult in
itself, they called it rightly \[Is. 58, 5.\]: \"to do evil to the
body\". But it was customary that in great dangers fasts were publicly
commanded. Thus Saul, when the army was in danger, ordered a fast. So
also Esther demands that a fast be announced, since she wanted to go to
act with the king because of the liberation 2) of her people. And we see
that the same is commanded here by the prophet, since the Babylonian
captivity was now imminent. But in the second chapter we will deal in
more detail with the fasts and other ceremonies. Now let us finish what
we have undertaken and summarize the whole doctrine of repentance. After
he had given the command to cease from mourning, and by fasting, by
which the hearts were to be prepared as it were for holy things, forbade
the taking of pleasure and eating and drinking, he exhorted all the
people that they should frequently come together in the temple, and cry
unto the Lord. This is the other part that makes repentance complete,
namely, trust in the mercy of God. For prayer includes faith. For if
there were no hope of obtaining forgiveness, why should one pray? But he
who prays earnestly holds in his heart that a fruit of prayer will
follow, that is, that God will have mercy on us and save us according to
His

2\) Erlanger: äsliUsranäo instead of: äs Uksrando.

1510 L. XXV, I6I-I63. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2IS8-2202.
1511

Mercy. There you have what repentance is: that one fears God because of
the sins committed, mourns over the sin, hates the sin, is earnestly
intent on improving his life; this is the one part. The other part is to
hold on to the hope of forgiveness because of God\'s mercy, which he
showed in his Son, first by promising him, then by giving him up to be a
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. This is the most pleasing
service to God. For he is pleased, first, with humiliation, and then
with this certain confidence in his goodness, which is obtained through
the Son.

But it is useful if we, each one of us, send ourselves in such a way, as
is commanded here by the prophet to all the people in general, that they
should first mourn, then pray in the temple when we are in danger and
feel the wrath of God or his rod. Although it is customary to mourn and
cry out in misfortune, the prophet speaks of another kind of mourning,
which arises not only from feeling the punishment, but from seeing the
sins, namely, when you seriously mourn over the fact that you have
brought such great misfortune upon yourself through your sins; then,
when you turn your eyes to Christ, and through this sacrifice, which is
presented to you by God, learn to rely with confidence on the mercy of
God, and ask Him for forgiveness, that is, that you hope not only for
bodily salvation, but also for forgiveness of guilt and for the gift of
the Holy Spirit, who will continue to govern you, so that you will not
fall again into similar snares of Satan. This is the right and some way
to get out of danger, but few follow it. For when they are overtaken by
misfortune, they either abandon all hope or take refuge not in God but
in illicit means, as Saul did \[1 Sam. 28:7\]. Therefore, they usually
perish in the midst of misfortune. What follows is a form of prayer.

**V. 15-20. O woe to the day! For the day of the LORD is at hand, and
cometh as one**

**Destruction from the Almighty. Then shall the food be taken away from
before our eyes, and from the house of our God joy and gladness. The
seed is rotten under the earth, the granaries are desolate, the sheds
are decayed; for the grain is corrupt. O how the cattle groan! The oxen
look miserable, for they have no pasture, and the sheep languish. O
LORD, I cry unto thee: for the fire hath burned up the pastures of the
wilderness, and the flame hath kindled all the trees of the field. The
wild beasts also cry unto thee: for the rivers of water are dried up,
and the fire hath burned up the pastures of the wilderness.**

To the teaching or exhortation to repentance, the prophet adds a long
and extraordinarily fervent prayer. But it is useful that such examples
of prayer are present in the prophets, against the ungodly imaginings
that those who have no knowledge of holy things invent. For some are in
the error of thinking that it is enough if they think only of their
misfortune. But they consider prayer or the recitation of certain words
to be idle and superfluous, since God looks at the heart and understands
our thoughts. But if this opinion is true, why did Christ himself teach
the holy Our Father? Why did he himself, when he was wrestling with
death \[Matth. 26, 39, 42, 44\], repeat the prayer with the same words
three times? Why did he make a prayer for himself and the church with so
many words at the Last Supper? Therefore, we are to believe that the
prayer with the mouth is commanded and does not go without certain
fruit, since it was commanded and used by the Son of God Himself.

On the other hand, others, because it is forbidden \[Matth. 6, 7.) to
make many words, hold that it is a sin if they use a large number of
words in prayer. But these do not recognize the reason why Christ
condemns it if one makes many words. For if the matter be rightly
considered, he condemns not the length of prayer, but unbelief. For
those who, for this reason, make a very long prayer, as if God were like
an unbeliever, do not believe.

[1512 **K. XXV, I6S-I6S.** Interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 1, 15-2V.
**W. VI, 2202-2206.** 1513]{.underline}

The judge, who is constant, either does not understand the matter or
does not want to hear of his own free will, unless he is driven and
provoked, as it were, by a long prayer, who sin. For hearts must hold
both: first, that (as Christ \[Matt. 6:32.\] speaks) our heavenly Father
knows what we need; secondly, that he will freely and gladly hear us, as
Christ says, Luc. 11:13: \"If ye then, being evil, are able to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall the Father which is in
heaven give the Holy Ghost to them that ask him?\" A negligent and harsh
judge needs long instruction to learn the matter, and is not immediately
changed at the first word; this, says Christ, is not the nature of your
heavenly Father. Therefore, it will be sufficient if you state in a few
words what you want, for he knows this before you pray, and because he
is merciful, he freely desires to give. Those who do not give God this
praise of wisdom and mercy, and for this reason say many words when they
pray, do not pray correctly. In general, all the prayers of the monks
are like this, in which they do not emphasize the promises of God, which
would be beneficial, but the sufferings of Christ on the cross and the
like.

The prophet is indeed very wordy in this passage, but not that he wanted
to teach God, not that he thought he wanted to move God in this way, but
he is urged by his heart movement that he cannot be short, and precisely
by the careful consideration of the present evils he encourages himself
to pray all the more fervently. Daniel does the same \[Cap. 9, 4. ff.\]
in his long prayer for the salvation of the people. The same does the
79th 1) Psalm, v. 3. since he also adds these sad words: \"They shed
blood around Jerusalem like water, and there was no one to bury\" 2c.
This is not said as if God did not know this or had to be provoked in
this way to help and did not want to help His people of His own free
will. The feeling of evil is so deeply imprinted in the hearts of the
godly,

1\) Erlanger: psalmus 18th, although the correct reading of the Jenaer
is noted in the margin.

that it can be seen as if it could not be expressed by any prayer,
however long.

It is a pitiful picture in this passage, since he says that everything
that is lovely in the fields is consumed by fire, and that the trees are
burned by the flames. But what more suitable picture of war can be drawn
than by comparing it with your conflagration? The cities, the villages
flourish at the time of peace, are adorned and provided with all
necessary things in abundance. But just as, when a conflagration has
arisen, everything is destroyed, and a miserable sight of desolation
presents itself, since everything, reduced to ashes, lies there in
confusion: so also war takes away all adornment and leaves a shapeless
desolation behind. Thus the prophet says shortly after, full of the
Babylonian enemy \[Cap. 2, 3.\]: \"The land is before him like a garden
of pleasure, but after him like a desolate wasteland.\" But why does the
prophet make use of this painting in prayer? Why was it not enough for
him to say that the enemy had taken away all adornment at home and
without? Did not God see, know and understand all this, as it would be,
if the prophet did not make it so great? He did know it, and the prophet
does not pray like this for the sake of instructing God, but his fierce
heart movement and the immense desire for the hoped-for help makes him
such an eloquent and fierce pray-er. For it is not fitting that prayer
should be slack; faith must shine forth in it. But the more frightening
the misfortune is made, the easier it is to expect it to be answered.
For you will not be a talker if, while praying against the Turkish
tyrant, you turn your eyes in your heart to Hungary, Macedonia, Greece,
Asia, so many glorious churches, so many thousands of people who have
either perished by the sword or fallen into the Turkish godlessness. For
in this way the heart is awakened to all the more diligent prayer, and
to all the more certain confidence in the answer, since God is merciful
and good, and can no longer bear such great cruelty.

1514 L. xxv, iss-167. interpretations on the prophets. srr. vr,
2206-2200. 1515

But here it is also necessary to note the emphasis which lies in the
prophet\'s saying, \"O Lord, to thee do I call.\" For in this way he
distinguishes his prayer and that of his people from the prayers of the
Gentiles. If you look at the words, also the Turks, also the Jews today
pray in this way, that they say, \"Lord, I call upon you. And also they
understand by it the eternal Godhead, from whom all things were created.
But this does not yet mean to know God rightly, if you know that he is
the Creator of all things; for this is like a man whom you do not yet
know, if you know his dress or his face. For these things even
unreasoning beasts observe and know; but if thou knowest his
disposition, then thou knowest him aright. In this way, those who know
no more about God than that He is the Creator of heaven and earth do not
know God, nor can they call upon Him in truth. For since they do not
know the mind of God, what it is like, they must also doubt when they
pray, and cannot determine anything certain about the answer.

But the invocation of the prophet is different. For in truth he knows
God, whom he calls upon, not only from this work of his, which shows
that he is the Creator and Sustainer of all creatures, but from other
things that are closer and that show his mind more clearly. For he knows
that this people is specially called, that it is the people of God; he
knows that it has been rescued from Egypt; he knows that after the
expulsion of the Gentiles it has been given the possession of the land
of Canaan and has been adorned with the word and service of God. These
are all certain signs that this people is loved by GOD. In praying,
therefore, he certainly considers that he is not praying in vain, for he
knows that he is asking a kind and gracious Father. These works show God
closer, as it were, and provide certain proofs of the benevolence that
has been given to this people in particular. But even this 1) is not a
perfect knowledge of God. For they do indeed prove the advocacy of

1\) Erlanger: kao instead of: Vase.

God\'s care, but only a temporal one and only for this fiefdom. But the
true knowledge of God is that the prophets knew that God had promised in
heaven the female seed that would crush the head of the serpent, that it
would turn away the curse in which the whole human race is because of
sin, and that it would bring blessing upon us, as God said to Abraham:
\"In your seed all nations shall be blessed. This is the right
characteristic; those who know this know God rightly, that is, they know
His heart and will, that He does not hate the human race for the sake of
sin, but loves it and will certainly save it through His Son, from
eternal death, from sin and from the tyranny of the devil. This
knowledge is followed by faith, which is certain; for how could the
heart doubt God\'s benevolence any longer? Or should he who promises and
gives his Son let himself be asked in vain for that which is far less,
and belongs only to this life 2)? This right knowledge has been in the
church at all times, and is the only source of true invocation. Since it
arises from the word alone, it is certain that not the Turks, not the
Jews, not any pagans pray, yes, not even the unbelievers who are in the
church. For though they proclaim the words, they know not him whom they
invoke; therefore they must doubt how it will come to pass, or whether
it will be answered.

But this knowledge of God does not only kindle faith; the church has at
all times had the certain promise that it would be heard. For in the law
there was a certain word that God would hear those who prayed in the
temple. For since God had chosen this place for His worship, and
promised that He would dwell there and hear the prayers of those who
prayed to Him, the godly who were lured by this promise could not doubt
the gracious will of God. In the New Testament, the church is not bound
to a certain place, as in the Old. For, as Christ says \[Joh. 4, 21.
23.\], neither on this

2\) Erlanger: vita instead of: vitas.

1516 L. **XXV, 1S7-I6S.** Interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 1, 15-20.
**W. VI, 2209-2213.** 1517

nor on that mountain is God worshipped, but the true worshippers worship
Him in spirit, that is, they are not bound to a certain place, but the
mind looks at Christ, and by calling on God in this way, it is heard
according to Christ\'s word \[John 16:23\]: \"If you ask the Father
anything in My name, He will give it to you. \[Matth. 7, 7.:\] \"Ask,
and it shall be given you.\" Such promise the Turks do not have, not the
Jews, not the Papists. Therefore, their prayer is entirely without faith
and does not deserve the name of a prayer; it is rather a mockery or
blasphemy against God. If there were a promise that God would hear those
who call upon Him in Mahomet\'s name, that God would hear those who deny
Christ, who would call upon Him in the name of Mary, Peter, Paul and
other saints, then the Turks, Jews and Papists could attach something to
their invocation. But since the Turks and Jews reject Christ, but the
Papists put their hope in the invocation of the saints, they must doubt
as often as they pray; for faith is based on the promise. Therefore,
where there is no promise, there can be no faith.

Therefore the prophet explicitly says: \"Lord, I call upon you\", namely
you, who made yourself known to us, not only by the glorious bodily
benefits, but by the promise of the seed of the woman, who was to crush
the head of the serpent; then you, who at this point commanded that one
should call upon you, and attached the certain promise to it that it
would happen that you would hear those who call upon you here: to you,
he says, I call. The Gentiles also call upon you, but they do not know
you, and they call without the promise of an answer, so they must
necessarily doubt, and rather blaspheme you than pray. For he who doubts
the answer takes away from God the glory that he is good and merciful.
Therefore, we should be mindful, reminded by this passage, that in every
true invocation, the first thing is for the mind to look at God, and to
recognize that God\'s will is such that He wants to help us, to help us,
to help us, to help us, and to help us.

He promised us salvation from eternal evil through his Son. Then that it
may also look at the promise, which speaks of the answer in particular.
For in this way the heart will be strengthened, so that it will pray
with certain confidence and doubt will be excluded. For although it is
right for us to submit to the will of God in bodily troubles, and it is
not necessary to insist on the answer, because when it seems so good to
God, we gladly want to obey His will and bow under His mighty hand,
nevertheless faith is quite rightly connected with this obedience. For
the heart has become certain of eternal salvation through the Son of
God, and firmly holds that we will not lack the mercy of God even in
lesser things, namely when His honor and our salvation require it.

But what is this that it is not enough for the prophet to say, \"Thee do
I call,\" but that he also adds something about the unreasonable beasts?
He says, \"The wild beasts also cry unto thee.\" Is there then also in
the animals any sense of God or knowledge of God? In this way the Psalm
\[Ps. 147, 9.\] says that the young ravens call upon the Lord, although
they are unreasonable animals and without the feeling of such emotions.
I answer: This is certain, that even the unreasonable animals recognize
their misfortune. For they are painfully affected by hunger, thirst and
blows, and show their pain and danger by howling. Since the Scriptures
clearly state that animals also cry out to God, it is obvious that,
although the unreasonable animals are without understanding and
knowledge of God, God is nevertheless moved by their cries. Therefore,
this manner of speaking serves to provoke us to faith. For since
Scripture testifies that God is moved even by the cries of animals, why
should we think that he will despise our tears and sighs, since we see
his mind and will not be silent in thanksgiving, in which he takes
special delight as in the most excellent service of God?

1518 L- XLV. iks-171. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2213-2219.
1519

**The second chapter.**

V. 1-11: **Blow with the trumpet in Zion, shout on my holy mountain;
tremble, all the inhabitants of the land, for the day of the Lord is
coming and is near. A dark day, a gloomy day, a cloudy day, a misty day,
as the dawn is spreading over the mountains, that is, a great and mighty
nation, the like of which has not been before and will not be again for
ever and ever. A devouring fire goes before him, and after him a burning
flame. The land before him is like a pleasure garden, but after him like
a desolate wasteland, and no one will escape it. They are shaped like
horses, and run like horsemen. Therefore they shall dash on the top of
the mountains, as the chariots rattle, and as a flame blaze in the
straw, as a mighty people prepared for battle. The nations shall be
astonished before him; all their faces shall be as pale as pots. They
shall run like giants, and climb the walls like warriors; every one
shall go straight before him, and shall not fail. They shall not err one
from another, but shall go every man in his order, and shall break
through the weapons, and shall not be wounded. They shall ride about in
the city, and run upon the wall, and enter into the houses, and come in
like a thief through the windows. For him the land shall tremble, and
the heavens shall shake; the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the
stars shall cease from their light. For the LORD will send his thunder
before his army; for his army is very great and mighty, which shall
execute his command: for the day of the LORD is great and very terrible;
who can bear it?**

The first part of this chapter contains a sermon similar to the previous
one. For he predicts the desolation of the kingdom of Judah by the
Babylonians. But the prophet uses so many words and images because he
preaches about a thing that is future and quite unbelievable for those
who are sure. And in this so long description three things are to be
noted mainly: First, that he describes the

time of war \"the day of the Lord\"; secondly, that he calls the godless
enemy of God\'s people \"God\'s army\"; thirdly, that he says \"the
Lord\'s thunder will go before this army\".

The designation \"the day of the LORD\" includes a beautiful contrast.
For as long as God gives time for repentance and admonishes through the
Word and calls back to the right way, the secure and godless world has
its day, that is, it does not care about God, not about His Word,
pursues its sins, and heaps wrath upon itself, as we experience today.
For since so many evils are threatening, the Turk is raging, the princes
are in disagreement, the pope with his own is plotting to destroy us,
what vices are not being committed? In the cities, among the powerful,
avarice, fornication, eating and drinking, and excessive splendor
prevail. But those who are poor and cannot live nobly, with them is the
highest infidelity, fraud and theft. But in general, among all, both the
highest and the lowest, there is contempt for the word of God,
blasphemy, and all kinds of outrages. I am afraid to recount the sins of
the courts. For there is the utmost disregard for the churches and the
law, and opportunities for all vices are sought with diligence.
Therefore, here is the day of the world, one does not think of the Lord,
one does not care about him. But the Lord closes his eyes to these
things for a time, he does not punish immediately, he leaves room for
repentance, but when wickedness increases, a change occurs. For the day
of the world passes, and the day of the LORD comes, as the prophet says,
a great and very terrifying day, in which the LORD will execute his
wrath harshly, and show that he is not a god to whom wickedness pleases
\[Ps. 5:5\]. Therefore the godly have this concern that they are not
safe with the world, but live in the fear of God, since they are sure
that the day of the Lord will come when the sins of the wicked will be
visited. Those who do this, the

1520 L- xxv. 171-173. interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 2, 1. 2. W. vi.
2219-2222. 1521

HErr will either preserve them from future calamity by death, as the
Scripture \[2 Kings 22:20.\] says of Josiah, 1) or will comfort and
preserve them in the midst of calamity, as Daniel did with the
Babylonians.

And this is the cause of such an extraordinary change, that the godless
people of the Babylonians, who lived securely in idolatry and sins of
every kind without the knowledge of God, without the \[right\] service
of God, are called the army of God, but the Jews, who were the people of
God, must be God\'s enemies, against whom God Himself contends, and
snatches from them all the gifts with which He had adorned them before
all the peoples of the earth. For why did they not obey the admonitions
of the prophets? Why did they neglect the word in an ungodly way, and
rather follow their lusts than God\'s voice? Nowadays it seems
unreasonable that the enemy of Christ and the Church, the Turk, the
cruel tyrant and wicked idolater, should be graced with so many
victories, while we, who profess Christ and are called by baptism to the
fellowship of the Kingdom of Heaven, are miserably oppressed and
afflicted. But our sins deserve these punishments, and since it is
absolutely necessary that we be humbled, God executes this through the
godless Gentiles, so that our shame may be the greater, and we may be
brought the more easily to confess sin and to repentance. For the
outcome remits us, not so that we should doubt our religion, whether it
is true or not, but so that we may be sure that God is so offended by
our sins that He can no longer postpone the punishments. But now let us
also look at the grammaticam.

**V. 1. Blow with the trumpet to Zion.**

This is just as when a trumpet is blown in our country or a sudden
danger is indicated by the beating of the drums, and the citizens gather
together, as is customary in the case of conflagrations and sudden
invasions of the enemy. For the Jews had no bells. Further, Zion

1\) Marginal gloss: Thus the Lord called Luther, the holy instrument of
God, away from the present unrest.

was the royal castle. But that he adds: \"Cry out on my holy mountain,\"
although some refer it to the mountain on which the temple was, for the
sake of the second Psalm I gladly take the holy mountain for Mount Zion,
on which the royal castle was, which is called the holy mountain because
of the holy King, Christ \[Ps. 2:6\]. **For the day of the Lord is
coming and is near.**

I have said above that \"the day of the Lord\" is called here the time
when the Lord visits the sinners. But because he adds that this day is
near, I conclude that this prophet was later than Isaiah, Hosea and
others who prophesied of the Babylonian captivity, and the chronicles of
the Hebrews indicate that he taught under Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah.
\"A dark day\" he calls, according to a common idiom of Scripture, a
disastrous and unhappy time, since Scripture calls \"light\" peace and
good prosperity, whereas \"darkness\" and \"gloom\" are calamities and
perils, as in Isaiah \[Cap. 8, 20.\], \"If they will not say this, they
will not have the dawn.\" And Ps. 23:4: \"Yea, though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with
me.\" For it indicates the certain danger of death.

**V. 2. as the dawn spreads over the mountains; that is, a great and
mighty people.**

This is an unusual but very significant image. For just as the dawn,
gradually increasing, suddenly illuminates the mountains, 2) so, he
says, this people will suddenly take over and fill everything. But that
he adds that such a people neither was before, nor will be for eternity,
I do not refer to the great multitude, nor to the repentance, but simply
to the fact that the first world empire (monarchia) was the most
blessed, as it is for this reason that Daniel compares it to a golden
head \[Cap. 2, 12\].

2\) We think that the following should be interpungir: Aurora onim
subito, inororoonta sumons paulatirn, iNustrat montos. In the editions
there is a comma only after sumolls.

1522 L. XXV, 173-175. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2222-2225.
1523

V. 4. **They are shaped like horses.**

This image also seems a bit harsh. But because a noble nature shines out
in a horse, and the latter excels in speed, the comparison with a swift
and ready man of war is not inappropriate. Here belong the following
parables of the rattling of the chariots and the crackling of the
consuming fire, with which he depicts the terror and the unavoidable
danger as with a vivid painting.

V. 6. **The nations will be astonished before him.**

The word is well known. Although the interpreters translate it in
various ways (for one interprets it as: they will suffer, another as:
they will fear, Jerome as: they will be tormented), it is nevertheless
certain that the simile is taken from the pains of those in childbirth.
The prophet therefore indicates the greatness of the danger, as if he
wanted to say: immediately at the sight of such a terrible enemy they
will lose heart and will be in pain like a woman in childbirth. But what
he adds: All faces will gather blackness, that is in Hebrew: All faces
XXXXX XXXX, will gather the pot. And it is certain that this way of
speaking is taken from the second chapter of Nahum \[v. 11\]. But
although this image is somewhat remote, there is no doubt about its
meaning. For in sudden dangers we blanch. But the prophet indicates a
blackish pallor. For as a pot set to the fire is blackened by smoke, so
in dangers the faces are changed. In joy, people become red with the
surge of blood; but when in sorrow and sudden danger the blood recedes
to the heart, a certain blackish pallor remains, and all the brightness
of the face fades away.

V. 7. **They will run like giants.**

This serves to illustrate the diligence, the seriousness, the care and
the promptness that each one will carry out his office quickly. What
Jerome has given: but will

The saying that they will fall through the windows and will not be
destroyed is quite senseless and deviates completely from the Hebrew,
which reads word for word: \"Although they throw themselves on the
swords, they will not be wounded, that is, they will fight with great
success. Even though they will be careless in exposing themselves to
danger, as hemp eager for booty 1) is wont to do when plundering cities,
they will still escape, and their daring will go out well.

V. 10. The **land trembles before him.**

These are terrifying (tragicae) images with which he magnifies
misfortune. For those who are in mourning and danger 2) consider
everything that they see with their eyes, even the sky and the light of
the sun, to be something sad and distasteful to them, just as, on the
other hand, cheerful and joyful hearts consider even that which is not
at all lovely to be something lovely that participates in their joy.

**V. 11 For the LORD will send his thunder** (**vocem suam**) **before
his army.**

What shall we say that this voice of the Lord is, by which both happen,
that the enemies with great courage despise all dangers and carry out
the cause quickly, but the Jews, paralyzed by fear and horror, despair?
Nothing else but that God makes the hearts of the wicked despondent, as
He, on the other hand, gives courage to the enemies. For the security of
the wicked does not last forever. As soon as the wrath of the Lord
breaks in, the sin that had lain in a deep sleep during the time of
security is awakened and torments the heart like a cruel executioner.
From this arises trembling and despair, that they flee even from the
rustling of a leaf. This is finally the end of godlessness. Hitherto the
prophet prophesied of the future desolation by the Babylonians, now he
warns as a physician that they should beware of this punishment and
escape from it by true repentance and prayer.

1\) Erlanger: prasäs instead of: prasdas.

2\) Erlanger: posito; Wittenberger and Jenaer: positl. We have followed
the latter reading.

1524 L- XXV, 175-177. interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 2, 12. 13. W.
VI, 2225-2229. 1525

**Thus says the Lord: \"Turn to me with all your heart, with fasting,
with weeping, with mourning**. **Rend your hearts, not your garments,
and turn to the Lord your God, for he is gracious, merciful, patient,
and of great kindness, and soon repents of punishment.**

This is an excellent exhortation to true repentance, and worthy of
diligent recitation in the churches today. The life of a sinful man is
nothing but a perpetual turning away from God, who turns to us by his
word; but we, after the manner of rebellious and disobedient children,
turn our backs on the Father who calls us to himself, and go where we
please, not where he calls us by the word. In this way, however,
stubbornness and rage gradually grow, so that it is the greatest
pleasure to have many opportunities to sin. For the wicked seek them and
surely despise the judgment of God. This life is well illustrated by
Christ in the parable of the erring sheep \[Luc. 15, 4. ff.\]. For the
further it goes astray, the further it goes astray, and the deeper it
falls into danger.

In this way the people of Israel turned their backs on God, who spoke to
them and called them back to the right way through the prophets,
rejected the right services and followed the inventions of their hearts,
as the times of Manasseh, when Joel probably lived, clearly show.
Therefore, the punishment of God was no longer lacking; the king was led
away captive, the land was plagued by hostile invasions and harmful
animals in many ways. But just as those who have gone astray go astray
the further they go, so the people who had turned away from God through
ungodliness, seeking remedies for their common misfortunes, increased
them through ungodly worship, and only provoked God more. Thus, the
papists make much in the way of masses, invoke the saints, make
supplications, enjoin fasting, but by doing so they do not appease
God\'s anger, but only inflame it more fiercely. For this is not the way
to reconcile with God.

That is why the Lord says in this passage: \"Convert to me\", that is,
do not turn your back on me when I speak to you, listen to me, and that
\"with all your heart\", so that it is not either a feigned conversion
or one that is not righteous (integra). For God wants the whole heart;
He does not want one to fear or believe in another God, as Christ also
says \[Matt. 6:24\], \"No one can serve two masters.\" But this is
common among us: when we hear in the Word what we must do, that we
nevertheless do not altogether reject or condemn the services and
ordinary customs hitherto held. Therefore he says: \"Turn to me with all
your heart\", so that we may pay the utmost attention to the word and
not deviate from it anywhere. This is the first thing, that we pay
attention to the word.

But what does the word teach? what way does it show us to reconcile to
GOD? \"Turn unto me with fasting, and with weeping, and with
lamentation; and rend not your garments, but your hearts.\" This is the
first part of repentance taught by the prophets. But the way of the Jews
is known, that they cut or tore their garments in disgust. Thus Annas
tore his garment to show his pain, which he thought he had suffered
because of the blasphemous word of Christ \[Matth. 26, 64. f.\], and in
the Old Testament there are many similar examples. But Joel expressly
says: \"Rend not your garments, but your hearts,\" indicating that he
wants it to be a serious pain, not a hypocritical one. For though men
bear sorrow in adversity, they do not bear sorrow in earnest. For it is
a serious and true sorrow to which the prophet exhorts, not to complain
about the misfortune we suffer, but to look at the cause of the
misfortune, namely the sins, to bear sorrow for them, to put them away,
and to commit them no more. This is only the right sorrow and the right
beginning of repentance. A lewd woman, an adulterous man, in addition to
the shame, also feel the curse and lack. That one bears sorrow over this
is nothing new. For this is the way of the old man, that he loves
himself, but does not grieve over his ills.

1526 L. XXV, 177-179. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2229-2232.
1527

He feels pain and laments, even though he does not yet hate or curse the
cause of the evil. But the pain of which the Holy Spirit preaches here
is that one is not only affected by the feeling of punishment, but by
the feeling of sin, that you have offended God through adultery, that
you have plunged yourself into wrath and condemnation. When this feeling
has taken over the heart in truth, only then follows what is usually
called a good resolution. Then the opportunity for forbidden lusts will
no longer be sought, the heart will also have a horror at the thought of
the past sin and shrink back from such a great shamefulness. This pain
is the work of the Holy Spirit, who terrifies hearts in this way through
the word of the law. It is not the work of a man, as the papists teach,
which could be done by us as often as we like; hearts must be awakened
in this way by the Holy Spirit. If the heart is without it, the old man
always holds on to the old nature and delights in sins, chases after
opportunities to sin, and delights in them as if he had accomplished
something good and happy.

Thus, when pestilence or theurization of the grain occurs, it is common
for people to mourn and lament. But how many are those who seriously
think about the source of these troubles and, reminded by these
troubles, stop sinning, improve their lives, reduce their avarice, their
lavishness, the carelessness in their profession 1) 2c? So the Jews also
suffered because of the harm done to them by the enemy and the noxious
animals. But they did not grieve over their idolatry, over the contempt
of the Word and the prophets, and other sins that had brought about such
great misfortune. Therefore, God commands through the prophet that the
hearts be torn, not the garments, that is, He commands that they should
seriously grieve over their committed sins. For when this happens, there
follows a serious amendment of life, the hearts

1\) Wittenberger: in invocationc instead of: in Vocation\".

They no longer follow their desires and their pretensions. Therefore,
idolatry, false worship, reliance on one\'s own works, and the whole
host of sins that ungodliness brings with it, lie low.

God demands such mourning and also remembers fasting, not only because
it makes one able to pray, but also because it is a sign of a seriously
troubled heart, just as tears are witnesses of the heart. The sinner
Luc. 7, 37. ff. who has fallen at Christ\'s feet remains completely
silent, but Christ understands her tears and tells her to be of good
cheer, because her sins are already forgiven. The prophet also demands
such weeping here. For the first thing in repentance is to recognize
one\'s sin, to be seriously frightened and to suffer because of the sins
committed. This repentance is followed by certain fruits, namely
improvement of life and a fierce hatred of sin. But although these
things are necessary, they are not yet sufficient for righteousness, nor
do they merit the forgiveness of sins, as the Sophists taught. For faith
in Christ is necessary; it alone obtains the forgiveness of sins and
makes repentance complete, because it is based on the mercy of God.
Therefore the prophet adds:

**Turn to the Lord your God, for He is gracious.**

This is a particularly glorious passage, in which the prophet paints God
with his proper colors, so that he may raise up the hearts that are
frightened by the greatness of their sins and call them to a certain
hope of forgiveness. For this is how repentance or conversion to God
becomes complete, when a certain hope and confidence in mercy is added.
We would have made good use of this passage, however, if we had first
raised ourselves up against despair with these exceedingly lovely 2)
names of God, and then also made an example out of it, which we followed
in order to correct that which

2\) We think that instead of sravissirnis in the editions suavissimis
should be read. After that we have translated.

1528 **L. XXV, I7S-18I. Interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 2, 13. W. VI,
2232-2235.** 1529

is flawed in us and contends with the divine nature.

The first name the prophet gives to GOtte is usually translated as
merciful, but it actually means \"gracious,\" willing, kind. What it is,
however, can easily be seen from the antithesis. We are by nature rough
and not inclined to gentleness; when we are offended we are not easily
moved to gentleness, we do not easily forgive, but, as the poet paints
Achilles as unforgiving and hard, so are we all in general. On the other
hand, God\'s nature is such that he is easily moved; he is not
unforgiving or implacable, he is softened at the first word of a
supplicant that I say so, and forgives. First of all, oppose this to
your thoughts, which portray God as ungracious and, as it were, as an
executioner with an unforgiving wrath. That is why we flee from him when
we are aware of our sins, especially when the punishment is in sight,
and, like Adam in paradise, we seek hiding places. But thou shalt
remember that thou hast wronged the gracious God. For though he inflicts
punishment, he does not for that reason depart from his nature; he
retains a soft heart that is easily moved, even when he seems to us to
be most angry. For he also lays up punishment from such a heart, that we
should not sink deeper into sins, but be converted and live. Why then
fleeest thou from this gracious and kind Father? He does not persecute
you that he may kill you, but seeks that he may bring you back to the
right way. Therefore stand still, turn to him with all your heart, and
he will show mercy to your sins. Ask humbly for mercy, and he will
gladly accept you.

But to those who are challenged with the feeling of wrath and their
sins, nothing can be said that is more unbelievable to them. Therefore,
the eyes must be directed to that extraordinary, very certain and
obvious sign of grace that God did not spare His Son, but gave Him up
for us all. Set this work of God before your eyes and think about it
diligently. For for the sinners God has given this

than. If, therefore, he has so kindly accepted sinners, and by the death
of his Son has shown that he does not so hate them that he should not
have the will to save them from eternal death and make them free: why
then do you now doubt the gracious will of God toward you, after you
have been reconciled to God through the Son of God? But, you will say, I
am a sinner, I have offended God, I have not obeyed His will as it would
have been just. That may be, after all; for we should not deny our sin.
So you have changed, from a good man you have become a bad man, from a
son you have become a disobedient man. But will you for that reason
think that God has also changed or become another? Rather, step away
from evil. You have sinned, stop sinning, ask for forgiveness, hope that
God is so reconciled to you through Christ that the reconciliation is
eternal, not for one or two days or years, but forever, and you will
learn that the prophet who calls him reconciled, kind, gracious, was not
lying. In this way, use this comfort first of all against sin and the
wrath of God, which 2) your heart falsely holds up to you as an
unforgiving one.

Then follow the example, and 3) be merciful like your heavenly Father.
Do not be too hard on the brethren, be reconciled to those who have
offended you. So then you have rightly used both sides of this sermon of
the prophet.

The second name by which the Prophet calls GOD is XXXX, this actually
means \"merciful\" who is moved by your misfortune of others. This
virtue of GOtt is also more easily understood by comparison. We rejoice
Nils at the harm of enemies, so we also seek opportunity to harm. But
that is not how God is. Although we offend Him with our sins and force
Him to punish us with our stubbornness, God does not take pleasure in
such actions.

1\) Erlanger: parvi instead of: pnrui.

2\) In the Jenaer referred to vei; in the Wittenberger and in the
Erlanger quum, referred to iram. The sense is the same.

3\) Erlanger est instead of 6t.

1530 L. xxv, i8i-iW. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2235-2238.
1531

Since he looks upon our misfortune with sorrow and grief, he would like
every occasion for punishment to be cut off, and although he is forced
to punish, he does so with an unwilling and reluctant heart. He would
rather not only spare, but also shower people with good of every kind,
if only they would obey his will. But since they stubbornly refuse to do
so, he does indeed punish and subject them to misfortune, but
unwillingly and to his sorrow. If we were to let ourselves be persuaded
of this in temptation, and if the punishments were to oppress us, how
well we would fare! But because we are of a completely different
opinion, namely that God hates us and takes pleasure in our misfortune,
we either despair or, overcome by impatience, begin to hate God.

Therefore, learn to judge the will of God, not according to your heart,
but according to the word of God, and ask God to write this short sermon
in your heart through His Holy Spirit, and a remedy for your impatience
will be prepared for you, and you will be encouraged to pray earnestly,
since you are sure of an answer. For if it is true that God is merciful,
that He is moved by our misfortunes, say, should He not, when asked,
give us help and save us? render us help and save us? Should he not
himself also desire to be delivered from so great a difficulty, if only
you do not hinder him, either by despair or by your impatience? Since
Saul was about to oppress the poor Christians who were at Damascus, and
deliver them into the hands of the ungodly, the Son of GOD cries from
heaven \[Acts 9:4\], \"Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?\" And the
epistle to the Hebrews \[2, 17. f. 4, 15.\] says that this high priest
is tempted in all things for this cause, that he might learn to have
compassion on our misfortunes. Therefore, do not despair, even if you
feel the punishment of sins; rather, turn to the merciful God or the
Beneficent God, and do not think that he, as a hostile adversary, takes
pleasure in your misfortune. For he is sorry that he is forced to punish
you because of your ungodliness, and he wants you to convert, so that he
will not have to punish you.

I will be able to put an end to it and show mercy to you.

But you must make an effort that you also do the same towards your
neighbor, that you do not rejoice over his misfortune, but rather bear
sorrow with him and either comfort him or also help him with deeds, if
your financial circumstances permit this. God demands this gratitude
from you, therefore it must be shown with zeal, unless we want to burden
ourselves with the judgment that was passed on the servant of the shawl
\[Matth. 18, 32. ff.\], to whom his master had remitted ten thousand
pounds, but who did not want to remit a hundred pennies to his fellow
servant.

**Patient (Ipse ira tardus).\*)**

This third name of God is commonly translated by one word,
long-suffering. But it does not sufficiently express the opinion of the
Hebrew way of speaking. For this means that God is not only not easily
moved to anger, but that even when one thinks that he is angry, and he
carries out the punishments, he is not yet really angry. For it is the
ruthlessness of a father that does not come from anger, but from true
fatherly love. For wrath looks badly on punishment, but when we are
judged by the Lord, we are chastened, so that we will not be condemned
together with the world \[1 Cor. 11:32\]. The Lord is not satisfied with
punishment, but seeks our correction and our salvation through
punishment. This, too, is very difficult for us to be persuaded of. For
immediately at the first blow, hearts think that God is angry, while it
is true that He is slow to anger and is not easily moved \[to anger\].
The examples of the wicked also testify to this. How often Pharaoh is
admonished to let the people go! And although he must suffer due
punishment for his stubbornness, and indeed many punishments, the Lord
nevertheless cancels them at the first supplications of the saints. But
since his raging against the people of God cannot be stopped in any way,
but he is now already about to destroy the

1\) This Latin keyword is after the Hebrew: v\'.prr isnx r \"n, he is
slow to anger.

1532 **k. xxv, I83-I8th\].** Ausleauna of Joel (2nd), cap. 2, 13. **w.
vi, 2238-2242.** 1533

The Lord is angry and drowns him in the sea. Therefore, the Lord does
not get angry unless there is no hope of recovery left. Therefore, when
you find yourself in misfortune and danger, search your heart to see if
you hate God so completely that you will not return to Him. If it is
certain in your heart that you wish to return, if only He will accept
you, if you sincerely grieve over the sins you have committed, and if
you sincerely wish to desist and be reconciled with God, do not doubt
that God is not angry; indeed, He has not yet begun to be angry, since
you have not yet begun to be one who must be despaired of.

But also this name of God must be made our example. We are easily
provoked, not only by any injustice, but also by almost every single
word. You must now remember to avoid this error, not to be easily
provoked, but to be slow to anger, and to forgive your neighbor gladly
when he has done wrong against you.

The fourth name of God is exceedingly comforting, as if to say: much
gracious. For it shows that God does not strike so that he may destroy,
but so that he may lead us back to the right path and move us to
godliness, that he may be kind to us. He is not like us who are hard
toward those who have offended us. For immediately we pull away our hand
and shut the boxes. But God is kind even to the ungrateful, and desires
to do good even to those who have done evil for Him. For He also uses
the rod out of such a heart that He wants to do good to those who
convert and repent, not only by mitigating and annulling the punishments
and giving bodily blessings, but much more by making us eternally
blessed, and not, as Paul says \[1 Cor. 11:32\], condemning us together
with the sure world. But alas, we poor people, who are utterly corrupted
by sin, that we do not allow ourselves to be lifted up by such sweet
consolations, but as it were morosely despise them as dreams. For our
eyes are as it were

so deeply buried in the muck of our minds that we cannot see this divine
light. Therefore, we must ask the Lord to open our eyes so that we can
see this heavenly light at least from a distance. For God does not only
want to show Himself to the people to whom Joel preaches. For because he
wants the atonement, which he has appointed against sin, namely his
eternal Son, to be common to all people, how can we doubt his attitude
and think that he does not also want to be like this toward us, as he is
described here by the prophet? Therefore, we should comfort ourselves
with this sermon against temptation, as if God were angry with us, and
then remember to keep looking to this heavenly example, so that we too
may overcome wrath and be kind even to those who have harmed us. For in
this way we will prove that we are children of God. Now follows the
fifth name of God.

**And soon repent him of the punishment.**

What kind of virtue this is can be understood from the comparison. When
people are inflamed with anger, they burn in such a way that they cannot
be satisfied with the misfortune of their adversaries. However, God has
a completely different nature. As we said above, he is not easily moved
to anger, and although he sends punishments in anger (for our hearts
consider that he is angry), he nevertheless repents of his counsel; it
seems to him that he has been, as it were, too harsh, and he rebukes
himself. In this way he says in Jeremiah Cap. 18, 8. 9.: \"If a people
turns from its wickedness, against which I speak, then I shall also
repent of the evil that I thought to do to it. And suddenly I speak of a
nation and kingdom, that I may build and plant it.\" This movement of
the heart is also experienced by parents. For it happens to us with our
children, after we have chastised them, that we throw away the rod,
blame our anger and judge that we have been too hard. But who believes
this about God? We take an example from ourselves and think that he is
like us, burning with anger, that no cruelty is enough for him. But this
is the highest

1534 L. xxv, i8s-i87. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, p242-2245.
1535

Blasphemy, the author of which is undoubtedly the devil, who for this
reason portrays God as cruel and fierce, so that we should not take
refuge in him and find relief from our misfortunes. However, the
Scriptures provide these glorious consolations so that we may rise up
and comfort ourselves in distress and not, overcome by despair, fall
into blasphemy, but rather find relief, give thanks to God and praise
His mercy.

But it must be remembered that if God is by nature as the prophet here
depicts Him, gracious, merciful, slow to anger, of great goodness, and
soon repentant of the punishment He has inflicted, how much misfortune
those bring upon themselves who abuse this great goodness of God and
surely continue in their sins. For he behaves in this way toward us, not
so that we should turn our backs on him, not so that we should despise
or transgress his commandments, but so that we, provoked by this so
great goodness, should unite ourselves with him, take hold of him,
strive to do his will enough, and by a careful and earnest obedience,
obtain this immeasurable goodness toward us. But alas, few do this. The
greater part surely goes away from God, and while they could have a
gracious God, He forces them to punish Him and makes an enemy out of
them by His obstinate malice. Let us not be like them, but let us awaken
ourselves to true repentance through this sermon of the prophet and
fortify ourselves against the despair to which we are naturally
inclined, because otherwise the hearts invent other ideas of God when
they are in distress, as he is depicted here by the prophet.

V. 14. **Who knows, it may again repent him, and leave a blessing behind
him, to offer grain offerings and peace offerings to the LORD your
God.**

In our language, this way of speaking is \"who knows\", as if nothing
would come of it (negative), or rather as if it were doubtful. But it is
a word that is very suitable for a penitent. For it comprehends both in
itself, both the feeling of sin which causes us to

The leprous man, in the Gospel, 1) says \[Matth. 2, 2\]: \"If you are
willing, you can cleanse me,\" and then throws himself at Christ\'s
feet. Thus, when the leper 1) says in the Gospel \[Matth. 8, 2.\]: \"If
you are willing, you can cleanse me,\" he first throws himself at
Christ\'s feet by this word, freely confessing that he rightly suffers
this punishment; then he shows the hope of salvation through Christ,
which shines in the feeling of his sin. This, however, must be the
constant form of our prayer, that we first humble ourselves because of
our sin, but then raise ourselves up to the hope of being heard, for the
sake of the promises made in Christ. As we said above, this hope makes
repentance complete and gives glory to God. Therefore, it is the most
pleasant service and the most pleasing sacrifice, which the hypocrites
cannot offer.

What he adds of the blessing is rightly understood of the bodily
blessing, that if the people repent, the Lord will shower them with
blessings of all kinds and deliver them from the Babylonian enemy. But
it also includes the promise of Christ, which is fulfilled in the last
days. For at that time the Lord blessed His people in truth and restored
the grain offering and the drink offering, that is, the right worship,
not feigned worship, faith, confession, calling in dangers, the
preaching of the mercy of God 2c. But we are also reminded here that God
adorns us with His blessings so that we may use them in the service of
God, not so that we may misuse them for the sake of idolatry, as is
usually the case.

This is a very beautiful and holy exhortation to repentance; if you
compare it with Pabst\'s doctrines, you will see that the right doctrine
is transformed into an exceedingly hideous monster. The prophet commands
that one turn to the Lord with all one\'s heart, that is, that one pay
attention to the word and follow the word and sincerely mourn over
one\'s sins; then that one rely on God\'s goodness and mercy.

1\) In the Latin editions oaeeus instead of Isprosus.

\'1536 **L. XXV, 187-189.** interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 2, 14-16.
**W. VI, 2245-2249.** 1537

With these two parts he understands the doctrine of repentance. But
listen to what the pope says. He commands repentance, and holds that it
is in our free will and deserves forgiveness of sins. But both are
false. Then he imposes the burden of confession on those who repent,
that is, that they must make a register of their sins and tell it to the
minister of the Church. But he also established that confession is
meritorious. Third, he adds an infinite sea of works, namely,
satisfaction, since certain works are imposed. 1) Because these are
always fraught with infirmity, and the conscience can never be satisfied
with them, they are rightly called a sea, 2) from which, once one has
got into it, one can never reach the harbor. This monster teaches
nothing of the fear that the law arouses in the Gentiles, since it shows
the wrath of God and accuses us before God\'s judgment. He teaches
nothing of faith, nothing of the promise, which alone brings us the
forgiveness of sins, and which alone satisfies the hearts that are
troubled by the fear of God\'s wrath. But if you investigate the works
of atonement more diligently, only then will the deceitfulness of Satan
become apparent. One person fasts 3) on certain days, another says a
certain number of prayers that he does not understand. You can find
people who hope to obtain forgiveness of sins through pilgrimages,
worship of images and other worthless things. Now, has not this
perversion of the right doctrine, indeed, the overthrow of it, been a
sufficiently great and cheap cause for us to separate ourselves from the
pope? But even the prophet does not completely omit the mention of the
works and ceremonies, so let us see what they are.

V. 15. 16. **Blow with trumpets in Zion, sanctify a fast, call the
congregation together. Gather the people, sanctify the congregation,
gather the elders, gather the youth.**

1\) Erlanger: injunZitur instead of: injun\^untur.

2\) Instead of appsUatnr (which is possible, referring to
satiskaktionkrn) we have assumed -appsllantur, referring to opera, just
like the old translator.

3\) Erlanger: jsjunint instead of: jsjunat.

**Children and the infants; the bridegroom go out of his chamber, and
the bride out of her chamber.**

So far, the prophet has presented the right doctrine of repentance. For
what else can be done by wretched sinners but to grieve over the sin
they have committed and to ask for forgiveness? Here, however, he also
adds something about the ceremonies and the outward customs that the
common people need in order to be awakened to repentance. It is useful
to see what ceremonies the people of God had, and from this it can be
easily judged which ceremonies can be tolerated or performed, but which
must be rejected.

We have said of true repentance that it begins with the knowledge of
sin, that by its nature, when it takes hold of us, it can do nothing but
frighten us, make us afraid and drive us into despair, but that it
becomes complete through faith in Christ, in whom God shows Himself kind
and reconciled to us, since through Him He has atoned for the sins of
all people. It is enough for everyone to keep to this, and God does not
demand anything else from us. For those terrors instill a hatred of sin
and create a desire to amend, even though they do not give us the
ability to do so. For this is given to us through the Holy Spirit, and
through faith in Christ we are justified, that is, our sins are not
imputed to us. God is satisfied in this way, and yet, according to this
teaching, the prophet also gives commandments of ceremonies. Why is
that?

I answer: The church of the elect is very small, but has a very large
number of the wicked mixed in. Since there are very few who truly
repent, but the greater part always remain the same, it is necessary
that, just as those who are not members of the true church do harm by
distress, so those who are members of the true church provoke others to
repentance by their example. Therefore, the ceremonies arranged for this
purpose are godly and wholesome, for they serve the salvation of the
neighbor and the glory of God. But by

1538 L. XXV, I8U-19I. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 2249-2252.
1539

an example will make the matter clearer. The Jews, as is evident from
this passage, used to sanctify a fast, that is, to publicly enjoin a
fast and to sanctify it, that is, to go either to the synagogues or to
the temple at the time of this fast, and there to hear the word of God,
by which they were exhorted to amend their lives and to pray diligently.
Since this was diligently done by the godly, the more unintelligent
people, reminded by their example, recognized that it was a great thing,
and were also provoked to the holy assembly and to prayer. For such
unusual events not only catch the eyes, but also move the hearts.
Therefore, the prophet does not merely command that a fast be observed,
but he wants trumpets to be blown from Zion, so that, moved to assemble
by this unusual sign, a great many would go to the temple, hear the word
of God and join their prayers with the others in the common danger,
since, if this formal and solemn convocation did not take place, a great
many would not care about the temple, nor come together to hear God\'s
word and perform their prayers. But both, namely the sermons and the
public prayers, are means by which the Holy Spirit tends to move the
hearts of the people.

Why, then, you will say, did you do away with the ceremonies of the
pope? Because the splendid pageantry, the musical instruments and the
excellent chants and everything of that kind were used to attract the
common people to the churches. Why then do you condemn such ceremonies?
Yes, why do you reject them? I answer: The purpose of the ceremonies in
the papacy and those which the prophet mentions here are quite
different. For in the pabstry the teaching authority has completely
fallen away. For idolatry has become so rampant that the service of
words is no longer included among the divine services. This is due to
the fact that among a thousand churches there were hardly a hundred in
which the people were taught and in which preaching stands were erected.
Saying mass and listening to it, before the images of the

To prostrate oneself to the saints, to adorn them and to hold them up
for worship, that was considered the highest worship; to this the people
were provoked by the ceremonies. Therefore, these ceremonies had to be
considered just as the divine services themselves, because they were not
only useless, but also ungodly, and served the ungodliness, and did not
edify the unintelligent people, but only sank them deeper into
superstition. But what the prophet commands in this passage is all for
the glory of God, that is, for the knowledge of God, so that people may
learn the will of God through the Word, both for their salvation and for
the edification of their neighbor. Therefore, this trumpet, by which the
people of the Jews were summoned to the Temple and the Word of God, was
God\'s trumpet, that is, a holy and blessed trumpet, whereas the bell
with which 1) the pope summons people to his ceremonies, which are
without the Word, without doctrine, is Satan\'s tool and a sign of
destruction, because it does not serve the word, does not help to know
God, does not improve people as the word tends to do, but only sinks
people deeper into godlessness and superstition and serves idolatry. For
this rule must be followed in ceremonies everywhere, that through them
the inexperienced, unintelligent and careless people should be
stimulated to learn the will of God in word, and to pray or invoke the
name of God. In whatever way this is done, it is done rightly. On the
other hand, if this is neglected, everything is in vain, even that which
appears to be extremely beautiful and holy. It should also be noted that
in the papacy many ungodly ceremonies have been set up, which go against
the word, as when they carry the bread around in pomp, when they go to
distant churches 2c. The Jews, however, had a way of fasting prescribed
by God.

But the prophet indicates this rule by saying not about fasting as such,
but about the sacredness of fasting, that is, he commands such a
fasting, which is the sacredness of fasting.

1\) Erlanger: ynidus instead of: qua.

1540 xxv, i9i-i\[3. interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 2, 15. 16. w. vi,
2252-225.\" 1541

serve things. For when we are sober, we are more adept at prayer and at
hearing the Word of God. The papacy also has many fasts, but they are
used for a far different purpose than that we should be the better able
to hear the word. Yes, they have no purpose at all, but the abstention
from food is considered in and of itself a service of God. Such fasting
was not known to the people of God, who always associated prayers with
it, and for the sake of prayers wanted the congregation to come together
soberly 1) as the prophet adds shortly afterwards, and the same is shown
by other examples in Scripture. Since Esther, in such great danger to
her people, is looking for advice on how to stop the intolerable
tyranny, she commands that a fast be announced. The people of Nineveh
also fasted to avert the destruction of their city through prayer, not
as if they thought that abstaining from food was a service to God, but
because this was an indication that their hearts were truly terrified,
and God wants earnest, understanding and sober prayer.

Such ceremonies, which serve the word, that is, for the knowledge of God
and the salvation of people, may still be performed today by every
pastor in his congregation. For this care is commanded of the pastors,
that as many as possible be attracted to the Word and be led to
godliness. Since ceremonies pave the way for this, those who pay careful
attention to the customs of their people do not sin, and introduce such
things as, according to the occasion of each place, are likely to
provoke the people to be present at the sacred assembly in which the
word is taught and prayers are offered. Here, however, the downfall of
proper discipline is to be lamented. For because we are forced by
necessity to do away with the godless ceremonies of the pope, many
people are of the opinion that ceremonies should no longer be permitted
in the church. Therefore, if someone in a godly frame of mind, since
rain is needed either in great 2) heat, or in prolonged downpours

1\) Erlanger: jkjuniam instead of: jkjnnam.

2\) Erlanger: statt:

If a priest were to hold an extraordinary meeting in bright weather and
sunshine (for I use this well-known example), or if he were to enjoin
fasting for certain days, or if he were to exhort people to improve
their lives and to pray earnestly, what diatribes he would have to
listen to, as the customs are now! For everyone would immediately cry
out that the papacy was being reestablished and that Christian freedom
was in danger. But look at this people; listen to the prophet, for whom
it is not enough that he has presented the doctrine of true repentance
purely; he wants a solemn assembly to be held, he wants certain times
for fasting to be decreed. Why? Is it that these should be services of
worship? Not at all, but so that by this, as by special signs, the rude
people who do not care for holy things, even the wicked, may be enticed
to hear the word and to practice prayer. For these are the means by
which the Holy Spirit is wont to move hearts; therefore they must not be
neglected. But it is the care of a godly authority to assist the
ministers of the churches in this matter, as there are examples that
this was the care of kings in ancient times. The godless king Saul
threatened death to the one who would cost something in the day when
there was danger from the Philistines, and he himself would not have
spared even his son if he had not been prevented by the people. This
strictness and keeping above discipline is necessary for the
authorities, because without these restraints the rough and unruly
people cannot be kept in their duty and cannot be restrained in any way.

Just as the prophet commands that this be done publicly, so we too, each
one of us, should remember that we must carefully maintain and preserve
this way of Christian discipline in our home. Godly house fathers
encounter much adversity every day. When one experiences this, it is not
at all proper that one should not turn away from it. Therefore, first of
all, consider that this is a punishment for your sins, and be diligent
and earnest to amend, not continuing safely to do what you have been
doing.

1542 L xxv. i\[3-i9s. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2255-2258.
1543

you used to do in the past. Then you must ask for forgiveness of your
sins through prayer and raise yourself up through a firm faith in the
promise of God. Since this is not within our efforts or powers, we must
ask God to awaken our hearts through His Spirit, so that we do not
deceive ourselves through empty pretense or hypocrisy. Then must be
added the discipline of which the prophet preaches here. A householder
should exhort his children and servants to holy living. He himself
should say certain prayers, which the servants and children should
follow when they come to the table or go to bed, confessing their sins
and lamenting their and the common misery and asking for salvation. To
establish this in every home (privately) is useful and godly, and no
better way can be shown for us to escape the dangers into which either
our carelessness or our godlessness has brought us.

So far, what the prophet has said about the trumpet and the holy fasting
has been explained; now let us add the rest. He wants the congregation
to be called together and the people to be gathered, so that no one may
think that he can stay away from such a large gathering without special
shame, and in this way as many as possible may come together publicly to
hear the word and to pray. For this it is that he saith, \"Sanctify the
church.\" For he null not that they should come together as for a
worldly spectacle; he wills that they should come together for holy
things. The manner to be observed in prayer is taken from Moses. He is
commanded \[Ex. 19:10\] to sanctify the people two days before they went
up to the mount and heard the giving of the law. The word \"sanctify\"
is interpreted in many ways. The Hebrews generally take it to mean to
prepare, and they say that this preparation consisted of the men
abstaining from intercourse with their wives and taking care to keep
their clothing clean. But these things are too small to be appropriate
to so great a cause, and to such a

We will rightly take the opinion from the third commandment, which
commands to keep the holiday holy, that is, to use it for holy things
and right worship, not for worldly business. We will rightly take the
opinion from the third commandment, which commands to sanctify the
holiday, that is, to use it for holy things and the right worship, not
for worldly business, which one was allowed to do on the other days.
Therefore, this word is applied to other things as well. The tabernacle
and the utensils of the tabernacle were sanctified \[Deut. 7:1\], that
is, they were assigned to the service of God, that in the tabernacle
alone the services should be performed, and those utensils should not be
used for any other unholy use. And 1 Chron. 27, 1) 20. the treasures are
called \"sanctified\", which were not used other than for the use of the
temple, which was holy. In this way I understand that the people were to
be sanctified, that is, that they were to be admonished by a public
commandment to leave all worldly business and work in order and to
occupy themselves with words and prayer. To this sanctification,
abstinence and sobriety or fasting are very well suited. 2c.

He especially remembers the elders, that they should be gathered
together. For by their example they are to stir up the others so that
they do not miss the public services. But why does he want the young
children who are still in their breasts to be brought to this meeting,
since they have no sense of the common need, nor do they understand what
is being done in this meeting? I answer, \"This is also done because of
the ignorant common people, so that the assembly may be all the more
honorable and have all the greater reputation. For the more
unintelligent people are reminded that even innocent infancy will be
affected by the dangers that lie ahead, so that everyone will ask with
all the greater zeal that they be averted. For we are naturally moved by
the misfortunes of children and desire that they be preserved. How much
sin, therefore, first of all the parents, then also those who are in the
parents\' place, the teachers, who do not teach the young people, who
are already advanced in years

1\) In the Latin editions: 1 karal. 20.

1544 **L. XXV, 195-198.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 2, 15-17.
**W. VI, 2258-2262.** 1545

Get used to the church service! Yes, how much sinful are also the
teachers of the churches, who either publicly treat the services
extremely carelessly, or are very seldom present, indulging in
gasteries, dice games 2c.

At the end, he remembers the bridegroom and the bride, and wants them to
go out of their chamber and abstain from the permitted pleasure in the
common mourning. Why this? Does he condemn conjugal intercourse? Is not
the joy of the bridegroom also praised in the holy Scriptures? Scripture
says of Christ \[Ps. 19:6\]: \"He comes out of his chamber like a
bridegroom,\" that is, full of joy and cheerfulness, he sets up the
kingdom of the gospel. But here the bridegroom and the bride are
commanded to go out of their chamber sorrowful and sad. Why? Namely,
because the terrifying day of the Lord was coming. Therefore, in public
danger, he exhorts all to the recognition of their sin and to serious
repentance, so that in time the wrath of God may be met. But compare the
useful exhortation of the prophet with our customs. He wants even lawful
and honorable pleasures to be refrained from in the face of common
hardships. But our people do not lessen their drinking, do not desist
from their blasphemies, do not lessen their usury, even though all of
Germany is in such disarray and the churches are in such danger. No
doubt, therefore, even more terrible hardships will come upon the
impenitent.

**V.17. Let the priests, the servants of the LORD, weep between the hall
and the altar, saying, O LORD, spare thy people, and let not thine
inheritance be put to shame, that the heathen should reign over them.
Why will you let the nations say, \"Where is their God?**

Here you see the cause of such a glorious gathering; for he does not
want them to be dumb, but commands that the priests should publicly
perform a prayer, which the people should then also repeat aloud. But
first of all, in this prayer, one must pay attention to the name of GOD,
which is called Tetragrammaton \[XXXX - Jehovah\]. For the Jews did not
call the Lord like the Gentiles, who lacked the Word and did not have
the right knowledge of God. They knew that

God was the Creator of all things, but they knew nothing of His will.
Therefore, they could not call upon God, that is, they had to constantly
doubt God\'s will. But the Church of the Old Testament knew God well,
because it had the Word, and by calling upon the name of the Lord, it
firmly believed that it would certainly be heard, not because of any
merits it had, but because God had declared through many innumerable
blessings that He was favorable to this people, and had given the
promise of the mission of His Son in the flesh, through whom He would
bless all generations on earth. With these signs, God had revealed
Himself to this people through His word, and it was to this God that the
saints called. Therefore, when they prayed, they could not doubt His
good will. In addition, the Lord had appointed a certain place for
prayer with His voice, where He would surely hear them when they prayed.
Although this was a tremendous blessing, which they could not doubt
would be answered, the blessing of the promised seed was much more
sublime and glorious.

But when we pray, we too must first determine in our thoughts who is the
one we want to call upon. And here the common knowledge which the Turks,
Jews and also the pagans have should not be sufficient for us. For when
they look at the arrangement and order (machinam) of the world, they
conclude that an eternal spiritual power (mentem) has built and governs
this world. This is to some extent a knowledge of God, as also in our
holy Christian faith the person of the Father is depicted, that he is
almighty and the creator of heaven and earth. But this is still an
imperfect knowledge. For to this must be added the promise of the Son,
that God gave the Son to atone for our sins through His death, and since
He rose from the dead, gave us the Holy Spirit, by whom hearts are
enlightened, and promised forgiveness of all sins, also to render the
obedience due, as far as it is possible in this weakness of the flesh.
Only this is the right knowledge of God; whoever has this calls out

1546 D. XXV, tS6-20ü. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2262-2265.
1547

God with certain hope. Because he sees that God has given his Son, he
has no reason to doubt his goodness, not even his sins. For he knows
that they have been atoned for by the Son of God. But as the Jews had
the promise that they should be heard when they prayed facing the temple
in which GOD had promised to dwell, so we have the promise, not of any
temporal place, but in the name of Christ, as he says \[John 16:23.\],
\"Verily, verily, I say unto you, If ye shall ask anything of the Father
in my name, he will give it you.\" Therefore set these two pieces before
thee, when thou prayest, that thou remember first to whom thou prayest,
and afterward also consider the promise. In this way the heart will be
awakened so that you pray in certain faith, that is, that you believe
for certain that what you ask will come to you. But the prophet
understands these two things in the word \"Lord\", since he calls him
the true and eternal God. The Son of God is called by this name in many
places.

The word XXXX is added even puffing; however, it means to spare and to
have mercy. Therefore it includes first of all the confession of sin, as
if he said: What we suffer, we suffer rightly. Secondly, it also implies
the hope of forgiveness, for it attributes such a heart to the Father
that he does not take pleasure in our misfortune, but would rather spare
us than punish us. But also here the condition is indicated, which is
very necessary in prayer. For before you ask anything, it is necessary
that you humble yourself before God, that you sincerely recognize that
you are a sinner, and not worthy to receive anything or to demand a
benefit from God, against whom you have sinned in so many ways all your
life. This humiliation is demanded by God, and it is called by another
name fear of God. If you then combine it with faith, you call upon God
in such a way that you also honor Him, that is, that you give Him the
praise that is due to God alone, that He is gracious and merciful, since
He forgives us and showers us with all good things.

not because of any merits we have, but because of his mercy, because he
is valid. If you prepare yourself for prayer in this way, that you know
the one you want to call upon, and look at the promise and confess your
unworthiness, then in due time you will report your need and ask for
help, just as the prophet does here, asking that the people be spared.

But there is a great emphasis in the pronoun \"your\". For it
distinguishes the people of the Church from all other peoples, who are
also God\'s peoples, that is, created by God and ruled by Him, but they
do not know God, nor has God revealed Himself to them through His Word.
The Church, therefore, has this glorious privilege of being called
God\'s people, since she knows God and God has revealed Himself to her.
But it is even greater that he also calls it his \"inheritance,\" or the
property and possession of God. For he includes in this designation all
the special benefits with which God adorned this people: first, that he
chose Abraham and adorned him with the sign of circumcision, so that he
would recognize that God loved him and cared for him. Secondly, that he
blessed his descendants, that he redeemed the people from Egypt, that he
gave them the word and worship, that he led them into the land of
Canaan, that he gave them prophets and kings and glorious victories. The
prophet understands all this by calling this people the \"inheritance\"
or property of God. And if one considers this carefully, it inflames the
heart and gives strength to prayer, as it were, so that the heart is
sure that we will not tire God in vain with our prayers, since He has
already testified to His exceptional benevolence toward us in so many
ways.

But this is even more glorious in the New Testament. For the Church is
in truth the inheritance of God, which God acquired through the blood
and death of His only begotten Son. If this inheritance is in danger, as
the tyranny of the Turk and the raging of the Pope truly indicate a
certain danger, we too should awaken ourselves to prayer and a certain
hope.

1548 **L- XXV, 200-202.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 2, 17-20.
**W. VI, 2265-2869.** 1549

God will hear us in the way that the prophet prescribes for his own.

But it is useful to look at the rest. The prophets often remember in
their prayers the distress they would like to have relieved, as the
prophet above in the first chapter \[v. 19\] remembers the burning and
devastation of the enemies, and the Psalm \"Lord, the nations have
fallen into your inheritance\" \[Ps. 79\] mentions the cruelty of the
enemies and magnifies it with terrifying images \[v. 3\]: \"They have
shed blood around Jerusalem like water\" 2c. The prophet omits all this
at this point, and only laments the shame: the Lord may not let his
people be destroyed by the Gentiles. For it would happen that the
captivity of the people would be a disgrace to God, because the Gentiles
would reproach the Jews where their God was, of whom they had boasted
that they alone had worshipped and known the true God, and condemned all
the gods and worship of the Gentiles. But this also serves to instruct
us about the purpose of the invocation. For the real purpose is not that
we may prosper, but that God\'s honor may be promoted. For it is often
useful for us to be afflicted by the cross. That is why Paul says \[Rom.
8, 26.\] that we do not know what we should pray for. But then we will
pray rightly, 1) and can be sure of an answer, if the honor of God is
connected with our danger. For the Lord has commanded us to pray that
his name may be hallowed. Although we have to ask for daily bread, the
care for the name of God should always come first, according to the
saying \[Matth. 4, 4.\]: \"Man does not live by bread alone, but by
every word that comes through the mouth of God.\" And just as the
promises are different, so a distinction is rightly made among the
needs. Some promises are bodily. For the church needs government and
protection in the face of so many dangers that befall us from the devil
and from the world. In these dangers we should hope for salvation and
take refuge primarily in the Lord.

1\) Erlanger: ornaverimus instead of: oraverimug.

prayers. And yet, because it is often useful for us to be tormented by
the cross (for it casts out certainty, 2) it awakens faith and kindles
prayer), we must resort to prayer in such distresses, but in such a way
that we nevertheless suffer God\'s will with equanimity if he wants us
to bear the cross longer. The spiritual promises, however, which concern
our salvation and God\'s glory, are to be grasped in such a way that one
does not doubt them. For the Lord has made known his will concerning
them, that he wants to make us blessed through Christ and that he wants
his name to be sanctified. Therefore, in every prayer, this end is to be
considered first and foremost, so that hearts can be sure of being
answered.

**V.18-20. Then the LORD will be jealous for his land, and will spare
his people. And the LORD will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I
will send you abundance of corn, and of wine, and of oil, and ye shall
have enough; and I will not suffer you to be put to shame among the
heathen any more. And I will drive him that is from the north far from
you, and will cast him into a dry and desolate land, even his face
toward the sea eastward, and his end toward the uttermost sea.**

To the exhortation to repentance the prophet added a prayer, which he
wants the priests in the church to say, and now he also adds a promise,
which includes these two parts: it will happen, if they repent, that the
Lord will bless their fields and keep the enemy away. But look carefully
at the words of the prophet. He says, \"The LORD will be zealous for his
land.\" The zeal is a fierce and righteous anger, such as is wont to be
when a husband experiences unseemly treatment in his wife, or parents
see their children treated unseemly. For on such occasions the heart is
moved beyond measure, and rightly so. Therefore, the fact that the Lord
promises that he will be zealous for his land is nothing other than that
he will not suffer in any way that the people who repent,

2\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: exoitat instead of: exouM what the Jena
offers.

1550L . XXV, 202-204. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI, 2269-2272.
1551

I will be treated too harshly. For just as in Isaiah he says of
unrepentant Judah \[Isa. 1:24\], \"I will comfort myself through my
enemies,\" that is, the Gentiles, who are my enemies, will comfort me
when they plunder you and slaughter you, and make a very pleasant
spectacle before me, so he says here: If ye repent, I will be zealous
for my country. I will not suffer the enemies to afflict you, but as a
father\'s heart is inflamed with wrath, and in every possible way comes
to the aid of his children whom he sees treated unseemly by strangers,
so will I be moved to bring you aid and afflict your enemies, and will
spare my people, that is, I will avert and relieve the punishments.
\"And the LORD will answer,\" that is, he will not be silent to the
prayers of his people. When he is called upon, he will be there and
hear, \"and say unto his people, Behold, I will send you corn 2c.\"

Truly, an excellent passage, and worthy of being diligently memorized.
For how can there be a more powerful exhortation to repentance than that
the Lord so graciously offers himself to those who repent and pray? But
oh, we are wretched people who are completely deaf to these exceedingly
sweet sermons! This was preached to the Jewish people in vain, so a
foreign enemy devastated the whole kingdom far and wide and led the Jews
away captive to Babylon. But we are doubly miserable if we are not moved
by such a terrible need and such a lovely sermon. For both are before
our eyes. Therefore let us pray to the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ to awaken our hearts to true repentance through His Spirit in
these miserable and perilous times, that we may take heed to the word,
beware of offenses, and be earnestly intent on improving our lives, and
in right faith call upon the Son of God to curb the raging of the Turks
and to prevent the godless plots of the Pope, so that when the churches
are shattered by wars and bloodshed, the light of the Word, through
which alone the way to eternal life is shown, will not be completely
extinguished among us. Amen, amen.

The interpreters mostly look for the history at this place that he
threatens to drive the one from midnight into the desert and to the
outermost sea. One interprets it from Sanherib, of whom it is known that
he was slain by his sons with the sword in his kingdom, when he
worshipped his idol in the temple at Nineveh; another from the tyrant at
Babylon, of whom it is likewise established that he was killed at night
in the castle at Babylon. These thoughtless speeches come from the fact
that they do not pay proper attention to the order which the prophet
keeps. For this whole passage is a promise of future salvation if the
people would repent in the way the prophet prescribes. But since they
did not repent, the promise was in vain, not through God\'s fault, but
through the fault of the disobedient people. Therefore one looks in vain
for a history, since the thing did not come.

**V. 20. 21. He shall rot and stink; for he hath done great things. Fear
not, O land, but be glad and of good cheer: for the LORD also is able to
do great things. ,**

The reader must keep in mind the order that the prophet carefully
observes in this sermon. In the beginning, he predicted that there would
be a devastation by the Babylonians. He then exhorted the people to
repentance and prayer, and prescribed a form of prayer. He also added a
promise that if the people repented, the mighty enemy would be subdued
by God and perish miserably. What he adds is related to this thought: He
will stink and rot because he exalts himself because of his deeds. But
you, dear country, do not fear, for the Lord will also be proud or
glorious because of the things he has happily done against this enemy of
yours. But because this saying is full of comfort, it must be treated a
little more carefully.

There is no doubt that the prophet is talking about the king of Babylon.
For to the lines of Hosea, the power of the Babylonians, after the
Assyrians were oppressed, increased greatly, and at first they also
afflicted Judah, for Manasseh was taken captive and sent to

1552 L **XXV, 204-206.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 2, 20, 21.
**W. VI, 2272-2276.** 1553

Babylon was led away. Therefore, this is a general saying which contains
a beautiful picture of the church and its enemies at all times.

For just as the Jews were a small, weak and poor people when compared to
the power of the Babylonian ruler, so the church is in truth a poor and
small group compared to its enemies. For the world has riches and
dignities, and because power is at its side, it is adorned with glorious
victories. The church, on the other hand, is poor, despised, and
subjected to the cross; it is miserably afflicted, so that it is almost
oppressed by its enemies. This unequal fate is also followed by unequal
heart movements on both sides. For the world is secure and triumphant,
as the prophet says here, thinking or doing nothing with moderation,
just like drunken people. But the church is oppressed and sighs, it
struggles with despair, it weeps. For what else should she do, since she
is afflicted and miserable in so many ways? Therefore the prophet says
in this place, \"Fear not, dear land.\" For he holds that she is so deep
in misfortune that she fears even that which is certain. Therefore, if
you follow reason, things are very bad for the church, but very good for
her adversaries. That is why they triumph, rise up, are full of joy,
because they seem to be safe; the church, on the other hand, is exposed
to dangers and very close to ruin. But hear here the prophet who says:
Because he has done great things, therefore he shall stink and rot.

Reason considers the glorious successes in the direction of things as a
foundation of tyranny. But the prophet judges quite differently, and
concludes that the higher they rise, the harder and faster their fall
will be. This almost unbelievable statement is confirmed by daily
experience. Look at Pharaoh in Egypt, at Sanherib before Jerusalem in
the days of Hezekiah, at Belshazzar among the Babylonians; did they not
fall at the very time when their power was greatest and their victory
most certain? But it is quite different with the church. Although there
is nothing but ferries

Even though she is in pain, sorrow, sighs and tears, and is therefore
close to despair, she is nevertheless assured of victory. How or why? In
no other way than because the enemies of the church rise up, the Lord
also wants to rise up, and does so in such a way that those who are
puffed up by success and boast about their happiness perish. Therefore,
the church should despair of itself and hope for good things from the
Lord, who, after the enemies of the church have glorified themselves,
will also glorify himself.

But this comfort must also be applied to the needs of each individual.
It is well known what the Lord answered Paul \[2 Cor. 12:9\]: \"Be
satisfied with my grace, for my power is mighty in the weak.\"
Therefore, if you feel your weakness, do not despair; rather, awaken to
the hope that the Lord will prove his strength, since your strength has
ceased and lies broken. For he is a helper in due time \[Ps. 9, 10.
Vulg.\], that is, he helps only when the need requires help. Therefore
do not despair in adversity, nor count your success by your strength;
look to the Lord, in him put all your hope, but none in yourself, for it
is certain that he too will prove glorious.

But this can be seen more clearly in the whole body \[of the Church\].
The Church is undoubtedly with us today, where the truthful teaching of
the Gospel and the right and pure administration of the sacraments are.
But this church has its enemies, who are driven by Satan. They are happy
for a while and flourish. But we are in danger, trembling and almost
despairing. This should not make us despondent. For it is true, certain
and undoubted that God will destroy the enemies of His Church. But the
stages are those which the prophet indicates here, namely that first the
enemies will become glorious (for this is what the Lord allows them to
achieve), but after that the Lord will also prove to be glorious. We
should therefore hold on to this hope and pray against the enemies of
the church, and because we see them doing great things, we should hope
that our God will also do great things and that his country will no
longer mourn but rejoice. Amen.

1554 \" xxv, 20K-M8. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, 2273-228.\"
1555

Mes is the first part of Joel\'s sermons, in which he exhorts his people
to repentance and promises them peace, victory and abundance of all
things if they obey. Therefore, this teaching is also useful and
necessary in our times. For it is well known what misfortune not only
threatens Germany in the face of so great a raging of the devil, but has
almost miserably oppressed it. But the only way to escape the judgment
of God is, as Paul says \[1 Cor. 11, 31\]: \"When

we judged ourselves\", that is, when we do not continue safely in sins,
but renounce vices, pay attention to the word, live holy and put
ourselves in prayer. Because the Jewish people would not do this, the
punishment foretold by the prophet finally came, and the whole land was
laid waste by the Babylonians, but the people were led away captive. But
here we will put the end of the second chapter, because what follows
belongs to the lines of the Gospel.

**The wide part of the sermons of Joel.**

**The third chapter.**

Here we will properly begin the third chapter. For the prophet now
passes from the people of his time to the joyful day and kingdom of the
Son of God in this world, which has been expected since the first times
of the world. For because the reminders and exhortations to repentance
were in vain, therefore also the promises of bodily salvation, which he
had graciously promised them, have not been fulfilled, but there has
been a terrible desolation of the whole kingdom of Judah. For the sake
of the elect among the people, the prophet prophesies about the kingdom
of Christ, so that they might lean on it as a firm support, since they
were almost oppressed by bodily adversity. For this terrible punishment
of captivity also befalls the godly, many of whom are cruelly killed,
many of whom, like Daniel and his comrades, are led away captive into
Chaldea. Although the Lord made the captivity of the blessed more
bearable, and some few returned to the holy land and to their old homes,
this prophecy of the kingdom of Christ was necessary because many saints
were killed in this exile, so that the saints could alleviate their
physical hardships through it. Nowadays, because the churches have many
different

If we have to suffer hardships, we do not place so much emphasis on what
belongs to this life, but raise ourselves and others by the comfort of
the future and eternal salvation through the Son of God, so that we do
not succumb or despair, overcome by bodily ills.

Just as you have heard a teacher of the law preaching about the sins of
his people and about the punishments that have already been passed, or
that are to be passed, and exhorting them to repentance and enticing
them with promises, so you will hear an evangelist teaching from the
Holy Spirit about the kingdom of Christ that will be on earth, what kind
of teacher he will be, what kind of success, what kind of enemies, what
kind of victories he will have. When you read this, remember the
glorious gift with which God has adorned this people, indeed, by which
He has at all times preserved, nourished and increased the Church. For,
awakened by this voice of the prophets, (as Christ \[Luc. 10, 24.)
speaks) the hearts of the godly desired to see the day of Christ, and
saw it \[Joh. 8, 56.\]. For as they waited for the redemption that was
to come through the promised Seed, and accepted it in faith, they were
saved, just as we also, who believe that the day of salvation will come
on the day of the Lord, are saved.

1556 **L. XXV, 208-210.** interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 2, 23, 24.
**W. VI, 2283-2286.** 1557

The Church has always had the same belief and doctrine, even though
there has been some difference in the ceremonies and outward conduct of
the true Church. For at all times the true church has had the same faith
and the same doctrine, even though there has been some difference in the
ceremonies and outward conduct. The first world, until the flood, was
governed by the ministry of preaching, which the ancestors handed down,
as it were, from hand to hand, to their descendants, teaching about your
promised seed and its victory over the serpent, and admonishing them to
beware of sins and the devil\'s temptations. For the godly had their
meetings, and the outward service in that meeting was thanksgiving and
sacrifice of what had been given to each through the blessing of the
Lord. After the flood, when the Lord had set Abraham apart by a special
calling and distinguished him from all other nations by the sign of
circumcision, the same preaching ministry continued until the law was
given on the mountain. Then the church was provided with special signs,
not only with circumcision, but also with worship and secular
government, even with a place appointed for worship and with certain
persons to preside over the worship. The services were such that they
modeled Christ and taught that the Son of God was to be sacrificed for
the sins of the world, so that the hearts, as this spectacle took place
daily before their eyes, would be reminded of the future redemption
until it was fulfilled according to the promise. Now that Christ has
made atonement for sins through his death, and his kingdom has been
established through the gospel, all those things of Moses have been cast
away as a shadow.

In this way, you see in the Church of God, as far as the outward form is
concerned, some diversity, but the faith and the doctrine have always
been the same. The hearts looked

1\) Instead of: a morts sorporis lmjus, which all editions offer,
according to Rom. 7, 24. a sorpors mortis Uujus will be read.

the promise of the seed and expected the suppression of the serpent. As
often as Adam, Seth, Noah, Abraham fell, they recognized that this was
the deadly bite of the serpent, which could not be healed by any human
remedy. Therefore, they humbly confessed the impurity of their hearts
and the oppressive power of the devil and the flesh. They relied
entirely on the promised seed; through him they hoped for forgiveness of
sins and right government. This faith was not in vain. For through
Christ they obtained forgiveness of sins, and by the Holy Spirit, who
was given to them for Christ\'s sake, they were governed throughout life
until they were called away from this world. The prophets had this
office, that they nourished this faith by prophesying and attracted many
people to it. For that they punish the sins of their people, that they
threaten punishment, that they exhort to repentance, of this they are
rather to be called teachers than prophets. This, however, belongs
especially to God\'s glory and goodness, that he has continued to kindle
this light of Christ through the holy prophets and has strengthened and
increased the church in this way. For this light shows eternal life and
eternal blessedness. But let us listen to our evangelist.

Cap. 2, 23. 24. **And, ye children of Zion, rejoice, and be glad in the
Lord your God, who giveth you teachers of righteousness, and sendeth you
down early rain 2) and late rain, as before. That the threshing floors
may be full of grain, and the winepresses have abundance of must and
oil.**

I do not think that a sincere and godly reader will quarrel with us
because we begin the sermon on the kingdom of Christ from this passage,
and not from the one Peter preached in Acts \[Cap. 2,

2\) In the Latin editions we find: 6t ässosnäsrs vopis tasit pluviam,
pluviam, st pluviam \[srotinam. It should either be inserted after the
second pluviam or perhaps read instead of the second pluviam:
/-n\'nranr. Namely Lrl. 6X68- opp., tom. XXV, p. 216 the early rain is
called pluvia prima.

1558 \" xxv, 210-212. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2286-228p.
1559

17\. ff\]. For there are two good reasons for this: first, that he makes
the promise of the \"teacher of righteousness. From whom else could we
understand this but only from Christ, the Son of God? Secondly, that
twice it is promised that the people shall not be put to shame again for
eternity. How could this be said of the people of the law? For although
it has returned from exile and has been reinstated in its dwelling
places, it has been plagued and almost oppressed in many ways by the
Syrians, Egyptians, and finally also by the Romans. Therefore, it is the
church of the New Testament that will not be disgraced in eternity,
because even though it is oppressed by the crown, it still has the hope
of eternal salvation and glory through the Son of God.

Thirdly, it is common that with the name \"Zion\" comes the church of
the New Testament, and for this reason. On Mount Zion in Jerusalem,
David built the royal castle, as the history of 2 Sam. 5:9 teaches.
Because Christ was promised to David, Christ is also called a king in
Zion, as the son and heir of David. Therefore Zion is called \"the holy
mountain\" in the second Psalm \[v. 6\], because the holy seed will
reign there, as the 110th Psalm, v. 2, says that this king will send his
scepter from Zion. For this reason \"the children of Zion\" are called
the church from their king, who will dwell in Zion and from there
establish a new kingdom through the preaching of the gospel. The church
did not get its name from Mount Mona. For although this mountain was
consecrated to the service of God, and is therefore also called holy by
the prophets, the church rather takes its name from Zion, because after
Christ appeared, these services were to be taken as shadows and
examples.

But the prophet exhorts the children of Zion to rejoice as over a new
and long-awaited thing, and expressly says that they should rejoice in
the Lord their God, so that he indicates that the arbiter or author of
this joy would not be men, not angels, but God Himself. For

In other acts of benevolence God uses the service of men or angels.
Through Moses he led his people, through Joshua, Gideon, Samson and
other heroes he defended his people, through the angels he gave the law,
through an angel he killed the firstborn of Egypt, and lifted the siege
of Jerusalem through an angel. But in this good deed, which the prophet
says God will do for his people, and because of which he calls for
rejoicing, God will not use the service of an angel or a man. He Himself
will be with His people and do them good. Therefore he says, \"Be joyful
in the LORD your GOD.\" Why or for what cause? What great thing will it
be?

He says, \"For he giveth you teachers unto righteousness.\" The word
XXXX is familiar; it means both a teacher and a rain, perhaps because,
as it says in Isaiah \[Cap. 55, 10.\], the same manner takes place in
both. The rain is sent down from heaven; good teachers are also a gift
from God. The rain falls on a dry land never without fruit, so in the
Church there is always some fruit of the Word. But here a Jew will
exclaim: What is this great or new thing? Did we not have the teacher of
God, Moses, and the prophets before? This is certainly true. These are
also rightly called teachers, and as it were rain sent down from heaven
on dry land, as Moses himself uses this image and asks, \"that his
teaching may drip like the rain, and his speech flow like dew, like the
rain on the grass, and like the drops on the herb,\" Deut. 32, 2. But
may you now be a Jew or otherwise, who consider this so 1) with you, why
do you not hold the divine majesty in honor? Why do you ascribe so much
to your wisdom? Is this not enough for you, since the Lord promises a
teacher after Moses and the prophets in this place, that you firmly
believe that this teacher is far superior to Moses and all the prophets?
and that he will necessarily bring a far different kind of teaching than
that of Moses, and indeed a far more excellent one?

1\) Erlanger: si instead of: sie.

1560 **k. XXV, p12-2I4.** interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 2, 23, 24.
**W. VI, 228S-22S2.** 1561

But here it comes to your mind what came to the mind of that scribe in
Lucas \[Cap. 10, 23. ff.\], when he heard the glorious praise of the
gospel, that the eyes and ears of those are blessed who see and hear
what the apostles see and hear. For when he heard this from Christ, he
thought that nothing more excellent could be taught than what Moses had
taught. For what can be better, more perfect, more holy than to love God
with all one\'s heart and one\'s neighbor as oneself? Moses has the
obvious testimony that he received his teaching from God Himself. Why
then is another teacher promised here? Is this holy teaching of Moses,
proclaimed from heaven, to be taken away? Or will this teacher be able
to teach something more glorious? With these reasons, the Christian
scholar hopes to overcome Christ in Lucas and force him to recant. But
just as Christ shut him up with this one word, saying \[Luc. 10, 28.\]:
\"Do this and you will live\", so the prophet Joel destroys these
thoughts with one word, that he not only says that God will give a
teacher or master, but adds \"for righteousness\", that is, who through
the word and through his teaching, which he will bring, will free men
from sins and make them righteous. No one will say that Moses was such a
teacher.

Moses teaches gloriously about the will of God, what God demands of us,
what we must do if we want to do the will of God. In this respect, Moses
has no equal. But what does John the Baptist answer? Certainly this
\[John 1:17\]: \"The law was given through Moses,\" that is, Moses is
only a lawgiver, he only deals with showing us what we should do. But in
the meantime, hearts corrupted by sin abhor this will of God and prefer
to follow their lusts. And if some restrain these vicious impulses to
some extent, it is only out of fear of punishment, not out of a true
desire to obey God or out of love for God. In the meantime, the heart
leans completely to the other side. But because

the law of God requires a pure heart, but we cannot even rule the hands,
the tongue and other members, so that we should not often sin against
the law of God, hence it comes that, as Paul speaks \[2 Cor. 3, 6. Rom.
4, 15.\], Moses is a minister of death, and the law increases sin and
kills it. For if the law were not, there would be no sin. Now that the
law is given, but our hearts convict us that we have transgressed the
law, what else is left but for hearts to be terrified, for sin to become
exceedingly sinful, and for the law to subject us to death? \[For as a
handwriting convicts you of guilt, so that you cannot deny it, so the
law is in truth a handwriting against us, by which hearts are convicted
of sin, and consequently subjected to the penalties established by the
law. Of such a teacher the Jews boast when they boast of the law and of
Moses, who 1) like an executioner and tormentor seizes the thief and
strangles him with the rope.

And yet this is true, that the teaching of the law is necessary, holy
and perfect, but the whole fault lies with us, for since through sin the
will and mind are corrupted, we can neither see what is right nor, when
it is shown to us, accomplish it. Therefore, another teaching, another
teacher is needed, who first of all cures this defect of the heart, and
then also gives us the strength to do what we are commanded to do by the
law. Since Christ is such a teacher, Joel gives him the glorious and
exalted name of being a \"teacher of righteousness\" and not, like
Moses, a teacher of sin. For since he indicates what we should do, but
we cannot do it, he makes of us nothing but sinners and weighs down our
consciences, frightens the hearts and fills them with fear, even with
hatred of God\'s judgment. For nature would rather that there be no God
than that it be subjected to eternal punishment. The law not only does
not heal this godlessness, but even inflames it.

1\) Erlanger: yuia instead of: qui.

1562 L. XXV, 214-216. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 22S2-229S.
1563

and multiplies it, as I have said, not through his fault, for it is a
heavenly rain, but through our fault, which, like a rock moistened by
great downpours, we nevertheless remain continually unfruitful.

Therefore, Christ, the King of holy Mount Zion, is the teacher of
righteousness, for he changes hearts through the Holy Spirit, and what
is still infirm in us he forgives, as the Baptist \[John 1:17\] so well
says: \"The law was given through Moses, but grace and truth came
through Jesus Christ.\" Grace is the forgiveness of sins given to those
who believe in Christ. Truth, however, is the gift of the Holy Spirit,
who changes hearts and incites them to right obedience, against sin, and
excludes all hypocrisy. The prophet promises such a teacher to the
church, and therefore calls them to rejoice in the Lord. Thus Isaiah
says \[Cap. 53, 11.): \"By his knowledge he, my servant the righteous,
will make many righteous,\" that is, the Son of God will reveal himself
through the gospel, and thus many will be made righteous. And Christ
says \[John 17:3): This is eternal life, that they may know you, the
eternal Father, and the Son whom you sent, Jesus Christ. And Paul \[Rom.
1, 16.): \"The gospel is the power of God, which saves everyone who
believes in it.\"

There you have the purpose or the effect of the teaching, of which it is
promised in this passage that the Son of God will bring it into this
world. But what the form of this doctrine is, although the passages of
Scripture above sufficiently teach it, is yet most beautifully expressed
in the second Psalm, where the King appointed by God on Zion says \[v.
7.\]: \"I will preach of such a manner, that the Lord hath said unto
me, 1) Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.\" These few words
comprehend the summa of the Gospel. For what does the Gospel teach but
that Jesus, born of the Virgin Mary, is the Son of the eternal Father,
2) but came into this flesh first of all to teach us about the merciful
will of the Father,

1\) \"that - has\" is missing in the Latin editions.

2\) Erlanger: M instead of: sit.

to make amends for our sins on the cross and to give us the Holy Spirit
and make us eternally blessed. Through this teaching, hearts are
inflamed by the Holy Spirit, so that they first truly love God, since we
see that He burns with such extraordinary love for us that He did not
even spare His Son for the sake of our salvation; and secondly, that
they accept the Son as the perfect sacrifice for sins, through which
alone the Father willed to be reconciled. Through this confidence we
obtain forgiveness of all sins and gladly obey our Savior, who calls us
to baptism, to the Word, to His Supper, and then also exhorts us to
love. The Holy Spirit, however, helps us so that the changed hearts
begin to stop sinning, and no longer give themselves over to sin or take
pleasure in it as before, and with the highest zeal devote their whole
lives to right obedience to God. Thus we become righteous before God
through faith in Christ, and we receive the Holy Spirit, who begins
obedience to God in us. Although this obedience is never perfect because
of the sin that still remains in the flesh, what is still lacking in it
is taken away through faith in Christ.

Then, says the prophet, rain will fall on you, early rain and late rain,
as before, and your barns will be full of grain, and your winepresses of
oil and must. There is no doubt that this is figurative. The Lord
promised in Moses (Deut. 28:12) that if they kept the law, he would open
up his good treasure, namely the heavens, to give rain in its season,
that is, when it is most convenient and appropriate, namely after
sowing, so that the seed may come up, and around the harvest, so that
the seeds, which are as it were exhausted by the rays of the sun, may be
revived. But the Scriptures call this rain \"rain of the spar\", which
the seed needs after a long heat before it is mown, 3) from the verb
which means to be late. The an-

3\) Erlanger: äswsratur instead of: demstatur.- Equally following in the
Latin editions: instead of the

Hebrew.\'

1564 L- xxv, 2I6-2I8. interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 2, 23-26. W. vi,
2295-2298. 1565

The rain that falls after sowing has the name that we translated above
by \"teacher\". The prophet therefore indicates the happy progress of
the gospel and beautiful fruits that will follow this teaching of
righteousness, not only in that small corner where the Jews dwelt, but
in the whole world. These are the full barns, and the winepresses
overflowing with must and oil. But this same promise also promises the
church bodily blessing and sufficient food, as this is connected with
each other in a similar promise in Isaiah \[Is. 30, 20\]: \"The Lord
will give you bread in tribulation and water in distress. For he will no
more cause your teacher to flee away, but your eyes shall see your
teacher.\"

Cap. 2:25, 26 **And I will repay you for the years that the locusts, and
the coopers, and the caterpillars, which were my great host, which I
sent among you, have eaten; and ye shall have enough to eat, and shall
praise the name of the LORD your God, which hath done wonders among you;
and my fullness shall be no more put to shame.**

I have shown above the reason why this part of the prophecy must be
understood from the time of the New Testament. For it is clear that a
teacher of righteousness is a teacher of the New Testament, not of the
law, and only righteousness has this honor, that it will not be
disgraced for eternity. But the reader will wonder why, when he speaks
of the New Testament times, he remembers here the calamity that came
from the locusts and other noxious vermin, which he thought of in a
slightly different order in the first chapter. But there are many
examples in the prophet, which teach that these secrets are covered by
them with diligence. Therefore, the prophet does not simply speak of the
locusts here, nor does he understand only the years in which that
calamity mentioned above fell, but he understands the whole time of the
law, which lacked this teacher for righteousness. This whole time was in
truth barren and unfruitful, as the epistle to the Hebrews beautifully
says \[Cap. 7, 18. 19.\], \"that the law was abolished.

Be it because it was too weak and of no use (for the Law could not make
anything perfect), and is introduced a better hope by which we draw near
to God\". He calls the teaching of the Law weak because we are weak to
whom it is given, and we cannot perform what it requires of us. For this
is just as if you were to command a child in the cradle to wait on and
serve at table; that would be a void and futile command. For the child
has neither the age nor the strength to do what has been commanded. So
also the law commands what we cannot perform because of the uncleanness
of our hearts.

Therefore, the law is not only weak, but also useless, and leads no one
to perfection, that is, it neither takes away sins nor makes us
righteous, but leaves us in sins and under the wrath of God, yes,
increases both sin and the wrath of God, and leads to despair. This was
therefore the reason why the old priesthood was abolished at the same
time as the law, and, as the epistle to the Hebrews says, that a better
hope should be introduced, which would cause us to draw near to God,
which would not, like the law, fill the hearts with fear of God\'s wrath
and turn us away from God, but would kindle in the hearts confidence in
the mercy of God. This is the doctrine of the Gospel, or, as the prophet
calls it here, the doctrine of righteousness, by which sins are forgiven
through Christ, and the Holy Spirit given.

Therefore, God says: I will restore or refund to you the years that the
locusts have eaten, so that you will have enough to eat, that is, you
will eat gladly and with special pleasure, as hungry people are wont to
do. But he also looks here at the law, which is rightly compared to food
that arouses disgust, not because the law is evil, for it is a dew sent
down by God, as Moses calls it, that is, it is a heavenly teaching. But
we have both a corrupt taste and a corrupt stomach, as it tends to be
with the sick. Therefore we are disgusted with the wholesome food,
because, as Paul says,

1566 XXV. 218-22\". Interpretations about the prophets. W. VI.
22S8-230I. 1567

Rom. 8, 7. 8.: \"To be carnally minded is an enmity against God, since
it is not subject to the law of God, for neither is it able to. But
those who are carnal may not please God.\" This is our sickness, which
corrupts the taste and the stomach, that the heavenly food is spurned by
us. For what pleases GOtte displeases us. On the other hand, what
pleases us displeases God. But because the law threatens the
transgressors with punishment, we are afraid of it and hate it. But the
gospel is the heavenly food, of which the prophet here preaches that we
would eat it gladly and with the greatest pleasure. For it does not
teach, as the law does, what God demands of us; it does not threaten
punishment, but it holds up God to us, as the prophet said above \[Cap.
2, 13\], as a gracious, merciful One, slow to anger, of great kindness,
and soon repentant of punishment. It indicates that the Son of God came
into this flesh of ours for this reason, that He might destroy the works
of the devil \[1 John 3:8\], that is, that He might put away sin,
overcome death, bring life, and destroy the tyranny of the devil. This
is the food that is pleasant and sweet to the mind, which the frightened
hearts, in view of their sins and in fear of the wrath and judgment of
God, eagerly take, just as a hungry stomach does. This is the first
benefit of this teacher, that he brings us the food that we have enough
to eat, that is, that we eat gladly and with special pleasure.

The other blessing is that he not only says: you will eat gladly, but
also adds: and you shall be filled. But also here he looks at the law in
a hidden way. For even though it has its services, even though it
indicates what is to be done, the law, like food that does not satisfy
hunger but only inflames and irritates the stomach, leaves hearts in
fear and doubt about their blessedness, and minds cannot rest in the
things we do. And this is generally the affliction of all intentions and
works that are done to appease God\'s wrath. For they leave hearts in
greater doubt and fear than they had before. In the papacy, many

For them, the temptations they had were the reason to leave their
ordinary status and to hide in the monasteries. For they hoped to become
free from them by associating with holy people (for at that time this
opinion was held of them) and by the constant practice of the divine
service. But in general it happened that to the former temptations
other, more severe ones were added afterwards. Not fasting, not
persistent prayers, not other exercises could cure this disease.
Therefore, all the actions of men, which are done without the Word, in
order to propitiate God and to remove the burden from the conscience,
are like food, which, when eaten, does not satisfy hunger, but inflames
it.

On the other hand, the gospel, which this teacher of righteousness
brings to us from the bosom of the Father, is the solid food that fills
and satisfies the stomach and takes away hunger. For by seeing that the
Son of God has become the sacrifice for us, hearts find rest in this
sacrifice, are filled with joy, and have a comfort that is certain even
in death. For should he be afraid of sin who knows that Christ, the Son
of God, was sufficient for sins on the cross? Should he fear death who
knows that through Christ the way to life has been opened? Should he
fear the tyranny of the devil who sees Christ at the right hand of the
Father? The same protection is to be opposed to the raging of the world.
For Paul rightly says \[Rom. 8, 31.ff.\]: \"If God is for us, who can be
against us? Who will accuse the elect of God? God is here who justifies.
Who will condemn? Christ is here, who died, yes, rather, who was also
raised from the dead, who is at the right hand of God and represents
us.\" These words and expressions of a triumphant man prove that Paul
was not hungry or suffering from hunger, but was full and as it were
drunk with joy, since shortly before, when he spoke of the law, of his
life and deeds, he exclaimed \[Rom. 7, 24.\]: \"I wretched man, who will
deliver me from the body of this death?\" 1)

1\) Here in the editions again, like Col. 1556, 6 6 na orte corporis
Nujus is instead: \<Ze corpore mortis Nujus.

1568 **L. XXV, p20-222.** interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 2, 25, 26.
**W. VI, 2301-2304.** 1569

Hence it follows in the prophet, \"And ye shall praise the name of the
LORD your GOD.\" This fruit always follows this satiation with the
heavenly food. But you see here also the clear difference between the
Law and the Gospel. \"The law provokes wrath\" \[Rom. 4:15.\] For the
hearts are moved against God. They judge that He is unjust and cruel
because He has burdened our weak nature with this immense load of the
law, which it cannot possibly bear. On the other hand, because the
Gospel preaches of the mercy and eternal benefits of God the Father, who
gave His Son as a sacrifice, and of the Son, who shed His blood for our
sins, and of the Holy Spirit, who enkindles confidence in God in the
heart through Christ, hearts break because they do not believe in God:
therefore the hearts, beholding these riches of God\'s mercy and
goodness, burst out in praise of God, praising His goodness, praising
and glorifying Him, and would rather forsake their lives than this
confession.

The Jews understand these promises of the blessing of the flesh, that
the Lord says he will restore the years of famine. But what follows
abundance of grain and peace is well known, namely what Moses says
\[Deut. 32:15\]: \"My servant has become fat and fat and strong and
horny.\" For the nature corrupted by sin cannot but misuse God\'s gifts,
not only for lasciviousness and hopefulness, but also against the Church
and God, therefore not praise and thanksgiving follow satiety, but
contempt for religion and the utmost security. Therefore, after other
misfortunes, God allows His Church to be plagued with hunger and lack.
But because it has plenty of the nourishment of the Word, and even in
the perils feels certain comfort, therefore the tongues are loosed in
praise of God. Thus it is said in the 51st Psalm, v. 16: \"Save me from
blood debts, O God, who art my God and Savior, that my tongue may praise
thy righteousness.\" And Hosea says \[Cap. 14, 3.\], \"Forgive us all
our sin, and do us good; and we will offer the farrows of our lips.\"
This, therefore, is the benefit upon which this fruit tends to follow,
that GOD may

be praised and his mercy extolled, as the prophet also says here: \"You
will praise the name of the Lord your God, who has done wonders among
you\". For these miracles are not bodily blessings and abundance of
grain, but that to us miserable sinners, who are by nature children of
wrath, the Son of God is given as a teacher of righteousness, who feeds
us starving people, who are under the law and wrath of God, with his
word, and in this way makes righteous people out of sinners, pleasant
people out of children of wrath, blessed people out of the damned,
immortal people out of mortals. In truth, these are miracles that no one
has ever done but this teacher of righteousness, the Son of God.

But the fact that he adds that they will never again be put to shame, I
have said that this is a certain proof that this is not to be understood
of the return from Babylon to the land of Canaan, but of the time of the
Gospel, especially since the Scriptures use this expression in other
places, where they do not deal with physical benefits, but with the
forgiveness of sins. In the 25th Psalm, v. 3, it says: \"No one will be
put to shame who waits for you,\" and Ps. 31, 2: \"Lord, in you I trust;
let me never be put to shame.\" But also this part of the verse contains
a strong contrast of the gospel and the law. Paul says \[Rom. 5, 1.
2.\]: \"Therefore having been justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have access by faith into
this grace wherein we stand.\" And Eph. 3, 12: \"By whom we have joy and
access in all confidence, through faith in him.\" And Heb. 4:16:
\"Wherefore let us draw near with joy unto the mercy seat, that we may
receive mercy, and find grace in time of need.\" For since the Gospel
shows that Christ, the Son of God, became the sacrifice according to the
will of the Father, and was sufficient for sins, therefore hearts do not
doubt God\'s benevolence, do not despair, do not flee from God, and have
placed all their hope in God\'s mercy.

1570 L. XXV, 222-224. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI\^2304-23O7.
1571

sets. But what does the law 1) do? It does indicate what God\'s will is
in regard to our works and what God requires of us, but because it does
not confer the ability to do this, nothing else follows from the law but
shame. For just as the sinner in Lucas \[Cap. 18, 13\] stands afar off,
not even daring to lift up his eyes, so it is with us when the law shows
us our sins and accuses us: we tremble, we fear, we dare not lift up our
eyes to God, we flee from God, and, like Adam and Eve in Paradise,
desire nothing more than that we might hide ourselves from His presence.
This teacher takes away this being put to shame, for this is absolutely
true \[Rom. 9, 33.\]: \"He who believes in Him shall not be put to
shame.\"

This is how I understand \"to become disgraced\" here. Others refer it
to the deformity of nature caused by sin, that there are shameful
impulses in the soul that fight against God\'s law, and the body is not
only subject to death, but also to various other hardships. For just as
evil desire constantly tempts us to sin, it very often drives us from
the right path and inflames our hearts against the law of God. But sin
is followed by its punishments. Thus, the whole life is nothing but a
constant disgrace, error and misfortune. For sin and the devil celebrate
daily triumphs over us as over slaves. But God helps this disgrace of
our wretched nature through this teacher of righteousness, who forgives
sins, gives the Holy Spirit and makes us heirs of eternal life. And this
interpretation is not unsuitable either, but I like the previous one
better, because it contains the beautiful contrast of the Gospel and the
Law. For the law brings shame, for it does not lead to perfection. But
the gospel fills the heart with joy and gladness, because it brings with
it the certain forgiveness of sins.

**Cap. 2, 27. And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and
that I am the LORD,**

1\) Erlanger: \<zui instead of: yuiä.

**be your God, and none more; and my people shall be put to shame no
more.**

So far, the prophet has taught of Christ\'s ministry that he will be a
teacher of righteousness, who, as Isaiah says \[Cap. 25:8\], will
swallow up death, wipe away tears from all faces, and lift up the
reproach of his people. What now follows is most properly related to the
description of this person, that you know not only what Christ does, but
also who he is, namely true man and true God. Although the Holy Spirit
conceals these mysteries, it soon becomes clear to anyone who compares
the scriptural passages that this passage has no other opinion. In the
third book of Moses, Cap. 26, 11. 12., is this promise: \"I will make my
dwelling among you, and my soul shall not reject you. And I will walk
among you, and will be your God.\" That this refers to the tabernacle,
of which GOD says he will dwell in it, is certain. A similar saying
about the temple that Solomon built is found in 1 Kings 6:12 f.: \"Let
this be the house that you build. If thou wilt walk in my commandments
2c., then will I confirm my word with thee, as I spake unto David thy
father; and will dwell among the children of Israel.\" No doubt the Holy
Spirit is looking at these promises in this passage. From the time of
Moses until Solomon, GOD dwelt in the midst of Israel because He had the
tabernacle in Israel made according to His will and adorned with certain
promises. But from the time of Solomon on, He dwelt in the midst of
Israel, because He had in Jerusalem the temple, or, as the Scripture
calls it, a house built according to His command and adorned with
certain promises. This is known and certain.

Now behold, in this place, when the Temple and the Tabernacle were still
standing, God promised through the prophet: \"And you shall know that I
am in the midst of Israel. Did they not know at the time of Joel that
GOd dwelt in Israel? But the temple was called the house of the LORD for
this reason, because the LORD had promised to dwell there. And

[1572 L. **LXV, 224-226.** interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 2, 27. W.
**VI, 2307-2309.** 1573]{.underline}

Isaiah says, Cap. 31, 9. that the Lord has a hearth in Jerusalem like a
householder. Why then does he say, \"You shall know\"? Did they not know
this beforehand? The prophet therefore indicates that in the time of the
New Testament God will dwell in the midst of Israel in another and far
closer way than He had dwelt in His house until now, namely that He,
conceived by the Holy Spirit and born of the Virgin, will clothe Himself
with our flesh, as the evangelist says by using this very figure of
speech (John 1:14): \"The Word became flesh and dwelt among us,\" and
the Baptist (vv. 26 ff.): \"He has come into the midst of you. He it is
that shall come after me, who was before me.\" Therefore, as you heard
above about the Teacher of righteousness, here you hear who he is,
namely, a man who dwells in the midst of Israel, not as he had dwelt
before in the temple, but visibly, as one who speaks with us face to
face and teaches righteousness; a true man, but of whom it can be said
that he is, as Isaiah (Cap. 7:14) calls him, \"Immanuel,\" God with us,
as the prophet now adds.

For it is not enough to know that he is in the midst of Israel, that is,
that this Teacher is truly man, but this must also be added: \"Ye shall
know that I the Lord am your God, and none more.\" This addition
completes the description of the whole person. For because this Teacher
is in the midst of Israel, it follows that he is a true man, and yet of
this man it must be believed and said that he is the LORD our GOOD, and
none more. Here, according to the rule of Athanasius, one must neither
mix the persons nor separate the essence. Above \[v. 23.\] he said,
\"Rejoice in the LORD your GOD, who giveth you \[the\] Teacher unto
righteousness.\" This is a clear designation of two persons; the Father
gives the Teacher, and the Teacher who is given is not the Father
Himself, but the Son who is born of the Father. Of this Son it is here
said, \"Ye shall know that I the HEART am your GOOD, and none more.\"
For the essence need not be separated.

However, many passages of the New Testament agree with this opinion. The
Son says \[John 14:6\]: \"No one comes to the Father except through
Me.\" \[Matth. 11, 27.:\] \"No one knows the Father, except the Son, and
to whom the Son wills to reveal it.\" \[John 14:9 ff:\] \"Philip, he
that beholdeth me beholdeth the Father. How sayest thou then: Show us
the Father? Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father
in me?\" And just before \[v. 1.\], \"If ye believe in GOD, ye believe
also in me.\" And John 8:19: \"If ye knew me, ye knew my Father also.\"
\[Matth. 11, 27.:\] \"All things are delivered unto me of my Father.\"
And Paul says \^Phil. 2, 9.s: \"God has given him a name which is above
every name\" 2c. For Paul does not speak of the mere name (de nuda
appellatione), as some dream, but of the glory of the Godhead, which the
man Christ possesses.

These and similar sayings are, as it were, an interpretation of this
passage, for GOD reveals Himself in the Son. John says \[John 1:18\]:
\"No one has ever seen God. The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom
of the Father, he hath declared it unto us.\" For since we cannot know
what is the nature of God, God sent His Son, His image or likeness. If
we know him, we know God. But in the case of the Son, one must not look
at the eyes, the mouth and the rest of the body, for this is what he
took from us and put on, but one must hear the teaching and look at the
works. He teaches that we are loved by the Father and that the Father
does not want sinners to die. He lets himself be hanged on the cross and
becomes a curse, so that we may be blessed through him. Behold, in this
way you know God, who He is, and what His disposition is toward us.
Therefore, whoever accepts the Son in faith, whoever honors the Son,
truly believes in and honors GOD. For apart from this Christ, who was
born of the Virgin Mary, there is no other God, as Christ says \[Jn.
10:30\], \"I and the Father are one.\" Likewise \[John 14:10\]:

1\) In the issues, \"If you knew the Father, you knew me.\"

1574 L. XXV, 226-229. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2309-2313.
1575

\"Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me?\"
Likewise 1 John 2:23: \"He that denieth the Son hath not the Father.\"

Therefore, because the Son of God put on our flesh and dwelt in the
midst of Israel, it rightly follows, \"My people shall be put to shame
no more.\" For He came for this cause, that He might destroy the works
of the devil \[1 John 3:8\]; that we, being freed from the law, might be
freed from sin, from death, and from the devil, by His merit and grace,
in everlasting glory. So now you have two persons of the Godhead, the
Father, of whom it is promised that he will send a teacher for
righteousness, and the Son, who teaches righteousness by dwelling in the
midst of Israel, that is, by becoming man. Now follows also an
exceedingly glorious testimony of the Holy Spirit, and of his office,
which he will administer in the new testament, sent by Christ.

Cap. 3:1, 2 **And after these things will I pour out my spirit upon all
flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; your elders
shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. At the same
time I will also pour out my Spirit on both menservants and
maidservants.**

We have heard the prophecy of Christ, the teacher of righteousness, who
will fertilize the land like a vine, so that it will bring forth
righteousness in abundance. But the name \"teacher\" belongs to the
ministry, for he is a priest who not only teaches righteousness through
the word, but gives himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the world.
Although the apostles also teach righteousness, they receive it from
Christ. For it is Christ alone who sacrifices for the sins of the world,
and that with his body. Now the prophecy of the Holy Spirit is added. We
have a credible witness, the apostle Peter, who says that this prophecy
was fulfilled on the day of Pentecost, when the Holy Spirit came down
from heaven and filled the hearts of the apostles and those with them
with His divinity, so that they spoke with tongues that they did not
understand before. 2,

2\. 3.\], and with great power gave testimony of the resurrection of
Christ Apost. 4, 33\], since they were terrified before they received
this heavenly gift, and not only did they not dare to teach, but they
hardly dared to leave the temple. Now that it is certain what this
prophecy means, and at what time and how it will be fulfilled, all that
remains is for us to consider the words carefully.

\"After this,\" he says, that is, after the Son of God, the Teacher unto
righteousness, has aligned his ministry, which, as we showed a moment
before, was a twofold one (for he taught righteousness and atoned for
the sins of the world by his death), only then will this also come to
pass, that the Holy Spirit be sent, as Christ says \[John 16:7.\], \"If
I go not, the Comforter cometh not unto you.\" Peter in Acts Cap. 2, 17.
sums up the whole time when he says, \"It shall come to pass in the last
days.\" For he is looking at the end of the Mosaic Law or the legal
services, which had lasted longer than fifteen hundred years in this
nation.

The word \"pour out\" is rightly interpreted of the great fullness,
that, whereas the Word had hitherto been confined to the little corner
of the Jewish land, through which the Holy Spirit had at all times
enlightened and governed the hearts of the saints, now, through the
apostles, the Gospel was to be preached in all languages, and the Holy
Spirit was to be given to the Gentiles also. Likewise, that the Holy
Spirit, besides the new light which He pours into the hearts, will also
manifest Himself through glorious miracles! And yet the word \"pouring
out\" is quite properly compared to the fact that he called Christ above
\[v. 23.\] XXXX XXXXX \[\"teacher unto righteousness\"\], which
signifies both a \"rain\" and a \"teacher,\" so that it is to be
understood that the Holy Spirit also is sent down from heaven like rain,
that he may moisten the dry hearts and make them fruitful, as it were,
as a barren field. Therefore, Peter also wanted to use this very image
when he says: \"Now that Christ is exalted by the right hand of God, and
has received the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has received the promise
of the Holy Spirit\" (Acts 2:33 ff.).

1576 k. **XXV, 22S-23I.** Interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, 1. 2. W.
**VI, 2313-2316.** 1577

*(έξέχεε)* [he has poured out]{.underline} this which you see and hear.
For David has not gone up to heaven\" 2c. Here it is evident that he
uses the word \"pour out\" to indicate that this gift was sent down from
heaven, like rain.

But all power is in the fact that he says, \"I will pour out my
Spirit.\" Peter changed the words a little, \"Of my Spirit.\" But the
point is quite the same. For all power is in the pronoun \[\"my\"\].
Since Peter has also retained this, the opinion remains the same. Now
here first of all observe the difference of persons. For you hear him
who promises to pour out his Spirit, and yet what is poured out is not
him who pours out, but something different. For this is the way we must
speak, so that we may ascertain the difference of persons, which must by
no means be blended. So also he said above, \"Rejoice in your GOD, who
giveth you the Teacher unto righteousness.\" Here one must put two
persons, namely the giver and the teacher. The Son who teaches is not
the Father who gives the Teacher, and the Father who gives 1) is not the
Son who teaches. And yet Christ says \[John 10:30\], \"I and the Father
are one.\" \[John 14:10. \"Do you not believe, Philip, that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me?\" In this way, the persons must also be
separated here. It is another person who pours out the Spirit; and the
Spirit who is poured out is another person than the one who pours out.
This is certain and true and must be strictly held.

But this must be added afterwards, that he does not simply say: I will
pour out the Spirit, but adds: \"My Spirit.\" So here it is the spirit
of the Father. But in the Father there is nothing that is not divine,
eternal, omnipotent. Therefore, this Spirit of God, which is not the
Father Himself, is the eternal and omnipotent God. Here, therefore, you
see the foundation of the Creed of Athanasius. I do not know if the
Church of the New Testament has a more important Scripture after the
time of the Apostles. He says: Another

1\) Erlanger: äonet instead of: äonat.

Person is the Father, another the Son, another the Holy Spirit. But the
Father and Son and Holy Spirit is one God, equal in glory, equal in
eternal majesty. As the Father is, so is the Son, so is the Holy Spirit.
The Father is uncreated, immeasurable, eternal, almighty; so is the Son,
so is the Holy Spirit, and yet there are not three uncreated, nor three
immeasurable, nor three eternal, nor three almighty, but there is One
uncreated, immeasurable, eternal, almighty. Thus the Father is God, the
Son is God, the Holy Spirit is God; and yet there are not three Gods,
but there is One God 2c. This is a necessary doctrine, not only because
without it there can be no knowledge of God, but also for the sake of
invocation. For as often as the mind calls upon God, it should in the
heart regard God the Father, the Creator of all things; and the Son,
whom the Father has begotten from eternity, His image, and whom He has
ordained to be the trespass offering for the sins of the world; and the
Holy Spirit, who proceeds from the Father and from the Son, and, as Joel
here speaks, is poured out by the Father through the Son, that He may,
as we shall soon say, sanctify the hearts.

This Spirit of God is called the Holy Spirit in Scripture. Just as 2)
the office of the Son is indicated by the fact that he is called the
Teacher of righteousness, so the Spirit of God is called holy by his
office, because he sanctifies us who are born and are born completely
unholy and godless through sin. For the poison of sin has not only
spread through the body, which it has turned from an immortal to a
frail, diseased and mortal one, but it has also corrupted our spirit.
For the mind has lost the knowledge of God, so that we walk as it were
like the blind in broad daylight. The will, however, is so corrupt that
it constantly quarrels with the law of God and is not able to be subject
to it. Therefore we are driven by the evil spirit, which

2\) In the editions there is still ut before sieut, which seems too much
to us. If one wants to retain it nevertheless, then instead of the
second vocatur is to be read: vooetur. The old Uel\^rsetzung has an
anacoluth here.

1578 L. XXV, 231-2S3. Interpretations about the prophets. W. VI,
23I6-23W. 1579

The people who take pleasure in sin and hate the judgment of God. But
the office of the Spirit of God is to heal these evils and to sanctify
the unholy hearts. This happens primarily through three things.

First, it takes away security from the hearts and instills fear of God.
For by nature we all delight in sin and are sure to indulge in it. Look
at David, who thinks that it is well for him, that after Uriah was
killed, he could obtain his wife without difficulty \[2 Sam. 11:27\].
After Paul received letters that he was allowed to rage against the
Christians in Damascus, he triumphed and considered himself lucky. When
a miser is shown an opportunity to gain even unjust gain, he eagerly
seizes it and chases after it. What need is there of many words? The
depraved nature diligently seeks and seizes opportunities to sin, and in
doing so is sure of God and God\'s judgment. The Holy Spirit, however,
first of all does this: He punishes the sure hearts because of sin, so
that they see the shamefulness of sin and pay attention to the
punishments that are inflicted on sure sinners. In this way, we begin to
punish sin and stop what has been done in an ungodly way, and with great
desire we ask God for mercy for past sins and for the ability to obey
God\'s will. Therefore, although sin does not cease to tempt us, with
the help of the Spirit of God we resist sin and kill it,

When this is accomplished in the heart by the Holy Spirit, for it is not
in human endeavor or wisdom, He then kindles in the heart the new light
of faith, so that we firmly believe that through Christ our sins are
forgiven and that the Father in heaven is reconciled to us. This is also
not the work of nature, but of the Holy Spirit. For when hearts consider
their sins, they naturally flee from God and fear His wrath. The Holy
Spirit takes away this distrust of hearts by showing Christ\'s sacrifice
and by the same inciting us that even if we are guilty of the most
grievous sins, we may be reconciled to God.

We must not flee from God or distrust His goodness, but come to Him with
confidence because of the mediator of Christ. Through this faith, as
Peter says \[Acts 15:9\], hearts are purified and we are truly
sanctified. For because we receive forgiveness of sins through faith, we
are counted holy and righteous for Christ\'s sake.

But faith is followed by confession, as the Psalm says \[Ps. 116:10\],
\"I believe, therefore I speak.\" Confession, however, brings with it
certain dangers and temptations. For the devil is hostile to it and
agitates the world against the godly; since the latter is able to do
much through power, dignity and riches, it plagues the church severely.
Here, therefore, the Holy Spirit\'s ministry and beneficence are felt in
an extraordinary way, strengthening and comforting hearts in the midst
of dangers, so that they do not despair or abandon the confession. The
apostles, strengthened by the Holy Spirit, despise the threats of the
priests; they are much more interested in teaching others about Christ
than in preserving their lives. The holy martyrs, as Prudentius reports
about Laurentius, Agnes and others, mock the tyrants in the midst of
their tortures; Stephen, when they were already stoning him, did not
respect his life, because he was worried about the blessedness of those
who sinned so surely. These are not human gifts, but certain gifts of
the Holy Spirit, who comes to us from on high through Christ and
strengthens the weak nature. But what they do in danger, especially when
death is at hand, who are without the Holy Spirit, is well known. They
tremble, they complain, they are afraid, they see nowhere where they can
find rest. That is how it is by nature. But the Holy Spirit of God also
changes and heals nature in this respect, not in such a way that he
soothes the torment or makes the body insensible to the evil (although
he also sometimes does this), but so that in the midst of feeling the
evil, our courage does not fall away, and we, looking to a better hope,
comfort ourselves and raise ourselves up through prayer, as he says for
this reason in Zechariah \[chap. 12, 10\] \"the spirit of grace and
prayer\".

1580 **L. XXV. NS-S3S.** Interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 1. 2. W.
**VI. 2S1S-2322.** 1581

is. The Spirit of grace, because it makes hearts certain of Christ\'s
forgiveness of sin; of prayer, because it prompts prayer in peril, and
by the hope of salvation alleviates present misfortune.

And this is followed by a long series of Christian virtues: Frankness in
confession, patience in carrying the cross, prayer with the certain hope
of salvation, certain faith in God\'s favor, although fate speaks a
completely different language, practice in words, in that the weak faith
aligns itself with the promises; and who can enumerate all the gifts of
the Holy Spirit in this weakness of ours? But this should stimulate us
to recognize God\'s immense mercy, who accepts us poor sinners in so
many ways, helps us, nurtures and cares for us, governs and protects us.
For he is not content with the fact that he has given us body, mind,
will, speech, yes, he also gives us his Son, who teaches righteousness
and becomes a sacrifice for us; he also sends down his Spirit from
heaven to heal and remove the incurable, deadly and eternal 1) diseases
of nature. He wants this to dwell in our hearts, to govern, guide and
exalt us, since we are driven and provoked against God in so many ways.
This is a tremendously great and quite inexpressible goodness; if we do
not acknowledge it, if we do not often consider it and give thanks for
it, we are quite ungrateful.

This also teaches us about the right invocation of the Holy Spirit, of
which the 51st Psalm gives us an excellent example, in which the prophet
complains about the miserable corruption of nature through sin, which
not only irritates us continually, but also drives us violently against
the law of God, from which many frightening cases and almost innumerable
ailments subsequently arise in the church. Therefore it is highly
necessary for us, since we are in so many dangers, that we diligently
ask for the government of the Holy Spirit according to David\'s example.
He first asks that the sins of the

1\) Erlanger: altkrnos instead of: astsrvos.

that would be covered and the iniquity be blotted out. For we are such
people that as long as we are in this life we cannot be without sins.
Therefore, there is no other way of healing than for the Lord to cover
and blot out the sins that are in us and, as it were, to close our eyes
so that He does not have to see them. On this forbearance of God rests
our salvation, which was purchased for us through the Son of God, who
gave himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. But because
we carry this treasure, as Paul calls it \[2 Cor. 4:7\], in earthen
vessels that are broken by a light blow, another heavenly gift is
needed, the Holy Spirit, to keep us in this grace so that we do not fall
from it. Therefore David continues to pray \[Ps. 51, 12.\], \"Create in
me, GOD, a clean heart, and give me a new certain spirit.\"

David asks that a new heart be created in him. This is a clear
confession that he has an unclean heart, that is, one that deviates from
the law of God and takes pleasure in sin. This, he wishes, may be
changed and made new, so that it is no longer impure, that is, so that
this impurity is forgiven, and for this, he says, XXXX XXX, a certain
spirit, is necessary, which continues to kindle faith, so that he does
not doubt God\'s benevolence because of the sins, but retains a certain
and constant hope of the forgiveness of sins. But he uses the word XXX,
which means to restore. For since we cannot stand firm in such great
weakness that we should not often fall, but the Holy Spirit is driven
away when one sins against conscience, this prayer is necessary that the
gift of the Holy Spirit may be restored to us continually, so that we
may not doubt that our sins are forgiven us through Christ. But this
saying includes faith, which we have put in second place above \[Col.
1578\].

David then prays for another gift, saying \[Ps. 51:13.\], \"Cast me not
away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me.\" Here
notice above all things the steps. There is in us an unclean heart, but
by faith the her-.

1582 L. XXV, 235-237. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2S22-2825.
1583

The law cleanses us so that sin, even though it exists, is not imputed
to us. But because sin continually tempts us and contends in us against
the law of God, not only is faith necessary, by which we firmly believe
that our sins are forgiven us through Christ, but we also need the other
gift of the Holy Spirit to sanctify us, that is, to strengthen and
awaken us, so that we do not obey the sin that tempts us, but resist it
and put it to death. For if this does not happen, if we indulge in sin,
the Lord casts us from his presence, that is, he abandons those who are
sure to sin to their lusts, as the examples are before us. Against this
great evil, David prays and asks for the sanctifying Spirit.

Thirdly, he adds \[v. 14.\], \"Comfort me again with thy help, and the
joyful spirit contain me.\" Now this is the third thing of which we have
said above. For since all who desire to live godly in Christ must suffer
persecution \[2 Tim. 3:12\], here also we have need of the Holy Spirit
to fill our hearts with the joy of God\'s salvation, so that, though we
are afflicted in many ways in this world, we may nevertheless take
comfort in the certain blessedness that has been acquired through
Christ. For this is what Paul says: \"Hope does not put to shame\"
\[Rom. 5:5\]. With this hope David associates XXXXX XXX, the joyful,
willing, noble spirit that will not grow weary in bearing the cross. For
this is the fate of the godly, that one temptation follows another, as
the 42nd Psalm, v. 8, indicates in an excellent image. For he compares
the church to a vessel on the stormy sea, which the tides shake from all
sides, and there is no end of danger, since one storm pushes another, as
he says \[Vulg.\], one abyss calls another. Therefore it must be a
joyful (XXXX) spirit, not a fainthearted and despondent one that gives
way at the first attempt, but a generous, high and unbroken one that is
not wearied by dangers, but is joyful and lively.

In this way, it is also fitting for us to pray daily that the Lord will
grant the faith of the Lord.

Third, that we may be courageous and constant in the cross and not flee
from danger for the sake of the confession. Third, that we may be
steadfast and persevering in the cross and not flee from danger for the
sake of the confession. For if God\'s Spirit does not assist us, it is
impossible for us to stand firm. But rightly do we, each one of us,
punish our sluggishness. For how many are there who think about these
dangers or are troubled by them? How many you can find everywhere who
have never called upon the Holy Spirit! Therefore, let us encourage
ourselves and ask for this gift of the Son of God, which He received for
us from God the Father, out of our hearts, so that the Lord will give us
His Spirit to govern, protect and strengthen us in this way, as Christ
says, Luc. 11, 13: \"My Father will give the Holy Spirit to those who
ask Him.\"

But I will also add this about calling: there is no difference whether
you call on the Father or the Son for the Holy Spirit. For it is the
Spirit who proceeds from the Father and from the Son. Therefore Christ
says both; John 14:26, \"The Spirit, whom my Father will send in my
name\"; and \[v. 16.\], \"I will ask the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter.\" And Apost. 2, 33. Peter says, \"Christ hath
received the promise of the Holy Ghost from the Father\"; and Ps. 68,
19. \"Thou hast received gifts for men.\" Quite properly, therefore, the
Holy Spirit is asked of the Father, but in such a way that you must ask
in the name of Christ, that is, that for Christ\'s sake this gift may be
given to you. And Joh. 16, 7. Christ says: \"If I do not go, the
Comforter will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you.\"
And Cap. 15:26: \"But when the Comforter shall come, whom I will send
unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth
from the Father.\" You can therefore quite rightly ask this benefit from
Christ; and it makes no difference whether you say, \"Eternal Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, give me your Holy Spirit, who will kindle faith
in me, govern me and strengthen me,\" or whether you say, \"O Son of the
eternal Father, Jesus Christ, give me your Holy Spirit, through whom I
will be comforted.

1584 L- **XXV. 237-2S9.** Interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 1. 2.
**W. VI, 232S-2328.** 1585

However, in the Church\'s example, we are invited to invoke the Holy
Spirit Himself. For she prays thus, \"Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts
of your faithful.\" And Basil adduces the words of Eusebius of
Palestine: \"Who we call upon the holy GOD, the Creator of light,
through our Savior JEsus with the Holy Spirit.\" Even if these
testimonies of the Church were not available, this is a sufficiently
firm and certain reason that those who confess that the Father, Son and
Holy Spirit are the true God, know that, even if they name only One
Person, they nevertheless call upon God, just as the Church baptized in
the name of Christ. I wanted to touch on this briefly, so that the
simple ones, when they pray, do not lay a rope for themselves.

So far we have said what the Holy Spirit is and why the Holy Spirit is
sent. Then we have shown by the example of David which benefits of the
Spirit one should ask for. Now the fourth part remains, that we also
teach about the means and, as it were, the instruments through which the
Holy Spirit is effective. But this is also a very necessary part of the
teaching. For not only are the dreams of the monks known, who prepared
themselves with fasting and prayer, but also the enthusiastic opinions
of others, who claimed for themselves that they were in possession of an
exceedingly pure doctrine. For these set aside the ministry of
preaching, which God willed to be in His church, hid themselves in
corners and indulged in I don\'t know what kind of contemplations, and
in this way awaited the promise of the Spirit in certain stages, which
they called by whimsical names. 1) In this way they only achieved that
they were not filled with the Holy Spirit, but with another, evil
spirit, which made them senseless and almost fools, as the examples are
known in the places where Münzer, Carlstadt, Storch 2) and other
enthusiasts have taught, and the greater part has subsequently gone over
to the Anabaptists, who do not understand anything about the Holy
Spirit.

1\) Cf. Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII, 1010. Table Talks, Cap. 37,
§ 1.

2\) Cf. Walch, St. Louis Edition, vol. XVIII, Einlettung, p. 10 d f.

are greater than those. These errors must be countered and certain
testimonies from Scripture must be given about such great things.

Therefore, we must remember what we said above about the certain and
undoubted works of the Holy Spirit, namely, first, that he kindles faith
in hearts so that they do not despair because of sins; second, that he
helps our spirits to resist and kill sin. Third, he comforts in
adversity. For if you ask, \"What are we by nature wont to do?\" it is
well known that the feeling of sin produces despair; it is well known
that we have a desire to sin, and that in distress our hearts fall and
tremble. This corruption of nature is changed and healed by the Holy
Spirit, not in those who have made monkish preparations and solitary
contemplations, but in those who have eagerly listened to God\'s Word.
For look at Matthew the tax collector. Why does he leave his profitable
and sinful state and unite himself with Christ? Is it not because he has
eagerly heard Christ? So also the woman, the sinner \[Luc. 7, 37\].
Since she had previously pursued the opportunity to sin with all
diligence and gladly seized it, she weeps miserably, bears sorrow for
the sins she has committed, and seeks forgiveness of sins even in a
strange house, in the midst of respected men, where shame should have
kept her from going, if she had been ashamed otherwise. But she does not
care about the judgment of others, and desires only to hear the word
that her sins are forgiven. Who has so changed her heart? Is it not the
word she heard from Christ? So also Zacchaeus has hitherto had his
delight in unjust gain, but promises to give half of his goods to the
poor, and to restore theirs \[fourfold\] to those whom he defrauded
\[Luc. 19:7.\]. Paul, too, although burning with anger against the
Christians, immediately becomes a different man at the voice of Christ
and promises to do what he is commanded and to leave the old way \[Acts
9:6\]. Thus, three thousand Jews respond to Peter\'s sermon \[Acts
2:37\], \"Men, brethren, what shall we do?\"

1586 L. XXV, 23S-241. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2828-2331.
1587

Therefore, the Word of God is the constant instrument by which God wants
to move, inflame and enlighten people, yes, change them completely, so
that those who were safe until now, first begin to fear the wrath of God
and the judgment, and improve their lives. Second, that those who were
despondent because of the fear of God\'s judgment comfort themselves
against sin with the sacrifice of the Son of God. Third, that even in
danger, and even in death, they hold on to the hope of salvation. Thus
Paul says Rom. 10:17: \"Faith comes from preaching, but preaching by the
word of GOD.\" But here it must be properly described what the word is.
The law is also the word of God, but through it, says Paul in Gal. 3, 2,
the Holy Spirit is not given, but through the word of the gospel.
Therefore Isaiah says \[Cap. 52, 7.\], \"How lovely are the feet of the
messengers who proclaim peace.\" For in truth there is nothing more
lovely, nothing more delicious than the preaching ministry of the
church, which brings the Holy Spirit, who kindles faith and the
knowledge of God, kills sin and comforts in peril. For he is like rain
that never falls on a dry place without some fruit following. Therefore,
if you desire to obtain the gift of the Holy Spirit, if you desire a
certain improvement of your servants and children, keep this way:
Diligently hear the word, keep those who are entrusted to your care to
the word. For it is the Holy Spirit alone who heals hearts corrupted by
sin. But he makes whole by the word of the gospel, in which we are
punished for sin, for righteousness, and for judgment. When we hear that
sin is in us, we are dismayed and afraid in our hearts, but through the
righteousness of the Son of God we rise up against sin and keep the
certain hope of salvation in all our troubles. For we know that the
prince of this world has been judged and overcome, so that he can no
longer harm those who are in Christ Jesus, even though he can, and often
does, challenge and afflict them.

Furthermore, when we speak of the word of the Evan

gelii, we also include the sacraments, because the promise of the Holy
Spirit and the forgiveness of sins is also attached to them. Therefore
Peter, when asked what to do \[Acts 2:38\], answered, \"Repent, and be
baptized every man in the name of Jesus Christ.\" And Christ says \[John
3:5\], \"Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God.\" This is a clear saying that the Holy
Spirit wants to be effective in the hearts through baptism, as Peter
also says \[Apost. 2, 38.\]: \"So you will receive the gift of the Holy
Spirit.\"

And this is also the reason why, following the example of the apostles
and the first church, we also bring the little children to baptism.
Because it is certain that the Holy Spirit wants to be effective through
the water of baptism, we firmly believe that the effect of the Holy
Spirit is no more hindered by the children\'s lack of understanding than
we adults make the work of the Holy Spirit more perfect through our
powers and senses. However, there are examples that even those who have
not yet been born are sanctified in their mother\'s womb and have also
had the knowledge of Christ. But since it is certain that the spirit in
the children is impure because of sin, why should we not grant them the
sanctification which Christ promises through the water of baptism, and
without which they cannot possibly be saved?

Therefore, let this doctrine remain certain and firm, that the Holy
Spirit is given through the preaching ministry of the church, that is,
through the preaching of the gospel and baptism. There let all seek him
who desire to obtain him. They should not miss the public meetings where
the voice of the gospel resounds; they should unite their prayers with
the prayers of the church gathered in the name of Christ, and when they
hear the holy sermons, they should earnestly ask that the Holy Spirit
imprint them on the hearts and write them with his finger in our hearts,
as Jeremiah promises \[Jer. 32, 33\]: \"It shall come to pass, when the
gospel is taught, that the law of God shall be written in the flesh and
in our hearts.

1588 **XXV, 241-243.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, 1. 2. W.
**VI, 2331-2334.** 1589

not, like the Law of Moses, into hard stones.

But here we should remember our weakness and God\'s great goodness, yes,
as Paul says \[Rom. 2:4\], the immeasurable riches of mercy. Baptism
clothes us with a pure and undefiled garment, for through Christ we are
forgiven all that is corrupt in us. But just as those who walk through
slippery and filthy ground easily fall or are defiled by others, so we
often fall from grace and lose the Holy Spirit through sins committed
against our conscience. This happened to David; therefore, when he
realized the danger, he prayed that the Lord would not take away his
Holy Spirit from him. Here, too, divine mercy has taken care of us. For
through Christ the keys were given to the church, so that those who
doubt about the forgiveness of their sins may hear Christ\'s
pronouncement, which he wants to be pronounced on all those who grieve
over their sins and desire to be absolved of them. The use of the keys,
therefore, also serves to restore in us the gift of the Holy Spirit and
to rekindle the faith extinguished by sin.

In this way also the Holy Communion is instituted by our Savior, in
which two things are given to us. First, the body and blood of Christ
with the bread and wine. Then the glorious promise, which tells everyone
who partakes of the Lord\'s Supper that Christ\'s body was given for us,
and his blood poured out for the forgiveness of our sins. In order that
hearts may not doubt this promise, the ransom itself, which was given
for sins, is presented to everyone who uses the Lord\'s Supper, so that
they may be the more certain and believe that the body of Christ was
given for them and that his blood was shed for our sins. This is also
the way of access to the forgiveness of sins, and the way of recovering
the gift of the Holy Spirit, which is lost through sins committed
against conscience. As we have said above, the Holy Spirit does not come
alone, but is not

As those who desire to call upon God earnestly, who desire to kill their
flesh and to show patience in the cross and not to become fainthearted,
they must be diligent to hear the Word diligently and to use both the
keys and the Lord\'s Supper frequently. For these are not mere or idle
spectacles, but instruments by which the Holy Spirit is active in us and
sanctifies us. Those, therefore, who seldom make use of these means, or
who, as many do, think little of the whole ministry of preaching, of
them it is certain that they are not driven by a good but by the evil
spirit, however they may disguise their actions.

But we will now finally come back to what Joel adds about the
prophesying, the dreams and the visions that are to be revealed to the
sons and daughters, the elders and the young men, the servants and the
maids. First, these distinctions of age, station, sex, serve to explain
what he said above in general, that the Holy Spirit should be poured out
on all flesh. For here will not be the distinctions as they were under
the law, where the office of teaching, of praying, of sacrificing was
commanded to certain people. For although, for the sake of order,
certain persons are appointed to govern the churches in the New
Testament, the gift of the Holy Spirit is given without distinction to
all who call upon the name of the Lord, whether they be women or men,
old or young, bond or free. Therefore, the prophet rightly uses the word
\"pour out\" to indicate the goodness of God, who desires to make all
men blessed through His Son and is not only kind to His people, but to
all peoples on earth.

But as far as the difference of the gifts is concerned, the description
is generally taken from the law. There prophecy means the revelation of
future events, both in the world regime and in the church. Therefore,
prophets were called those to whom future events were revealed by the
Holy Spirit. The

1590XXV , 243-246. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2S34-2S37.
1591

But the highest level was that of those who taught the knowledge of
Christ and the coming of his kingdom. But those who prophesied either
about the fate of individual people or about the world regime were not
held in such high esteem. David and Isaiah have many prophesies about
Christ, but Isaiah also prophesied about the fate of the world kingdoms.
In the histories of the kings, we are presented with the examples of
many people who reveal future events to certain people. Thus Jeroboam is
informed about the kingdom of the ten tribes \[1 Kings 11:31\],
Nebuchadnezzar about the fact that he will become senseless and lose his
kingdom \[Dan. 4:28\].

But now we ask about the way in which this is made known to people
through the Holy Spirit. First of all, we must remember that the
ministry of the Word has always been preserved in the church through the
beneficence of the Holy Spirit, that the hearts of very many have been
awakened by the Word, that they saw the future kingdom of Christ in the
oral word, as if it were sketched out on a tablet, and that afterwards
they presented it to the world more clearly, as if it were painted with
colors and put in a good light. Thus, the sermons of God and the holy
fathers, which Moses narrates everywhere, taught David, Isaiah and
Jeremiah well.

Daniel, as he himself reports \[Cap. 9, 2\], inspired by the reading of
the prophecy revealed by Jeremiah \[Cap. 25, 11\], remembers the end of
the captivity, and as he prays for the rest of the people, he is also
informed by an angel about the coming of the kingdom of Christ. Although
Daniel learned this through the ministry of the angel, the beginning
and, as it were, the occasion for it came from the diligent reading of
the Word. And Christ gives to understand \[Joh. 5, 39.\] that to those
who search the Scriptures the secret of the kingdom of heaven will be
revealed. This, therefore, is the first means by which God revealed the
mystery of faith and the knowledge of Christ to the holy prophets.

When Isaiah read the sermon about the seed of the woman who would crush
the serpent\'s head, and about the serpent who would prick the seed in
the heel, he received

through diligent meditation on these things by the Holy Spirit, the
light so bright that he prophesied so clearly of the death and suffering
of Christ, and at the same time showed that he was God by nature. For
the overcoming of the devil is not a man\'s work; but the feeling of the
bite of the serpent belongs to a man, not to God.

When David read the same prophecy, he also saw, by the impulse of the
Holy Spirit, that this seed was the Son of God; therefore, in the 110th
Psalm, v. 1, he calls him \"his Lord. In the second Psalm, v. 7, he
expressly indicates that he was born of God and eternal.

Also Isaiah, when he read the prophecy of Jacob \[Gen. 49:10\] that
Christ would come when the scepter and the prophecy were gone, saw that
from the root of Jesse, as if from a dead stem, a rod or branch, the Son
of God, would grow forth. Although everything concerning the kingdom of
Christ has been fulfilled, this should still admonish us to read the
Scriptures diligently. For we see that this becomes clearer through
diligence and godly contemplation; not as if this were due to our
perspicacity, but because the Holy Spirit uses the Word as His
instrument through which He enkindles and moves hearts.

Another way of revelation is through the angels, as is known from Daniel
\[Cap. 9, 21. ff.\], that he was so instructed about the time of the
Messiah, when the Son of God should be born.

But as some histories of the New Testament clearly show, the angels did
not always let themselves be seen in human form, as Gideon, Manoah and
others saw the angels, nor did the angels always speak with a human
voice, as to Mary, but indicated future things by dreams and visions.
For these prophetic dreams are not something human or accidental, but
they are inspired by good angels who so move the senses, just as it is
certain that the evil angels cause shameful and terrible dreams.
However, the dreams are also sometimes called visions, namely when
images of future

1592 **XXV, S46-248.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, I-4. W.
**VI, 2337-2340.** 1593

The visions are called visions when images of future events are
presented, like Nebuchadnezzar sees a tree \[Dan. 4, 7\], like the
Egyptian cupbearer \[Gen. 40, 9. ff\] sees that he holds the grapes in
his hand and presents them to the king. But actually these are called
visions, if not in sleep, but in waking state pictures of future things
are held up, as Daniel, when he was awake \[Dan. 8, 3.\], saw a ram
standing before the water 2c. Although in this way prophecy, dream and
vision are different things, they all have the same purpose, namely,
that God teaches through them about future events.

What then, you will say, is the use of dreams, visions and prophecy
after the Holy Spirit is sent? Or what is the need for dreams and
visions? Is there anything left to be revealed concerning the kingdom of
Christ? That would certainly be a pleasing fist to the papists, who
impudently claim that not everything is taught in the holy scriptures
that is necessary for salvation. The Anabaptists also dream of new
revelations. And in former times there was a superstition in some
monasteries that they believed that all dreams had to be written out and
were to be taken for revelations.

But the prophet explains himself sufficiently when he says that the
Spirit of the Lord should be poured out on servants and maids. For he
does not speak of new revelations through dreams and visions, but simply
of the gift of the Holy Spirit, who purifies the hearts and governs the
minds. In truth, this gift belongs to this time in the New Testament.
For although there is no lack of prophecy or the gift of prophecy in
later times, this is to be placed far below the gift of which the
prophet here remembers. For the right knowledge of the Son of God brings
the knowledge of the Father, it brings forgiveness of sins, it brings
the right guidance, so that we do not give way to temptation and sin
does not reign in us, in short, it brings eternal life, while the gift
to prophesy about future events can also be with the wicked, as Balaam
was \[4 Mos. 23, 7. ff.\], and that prophet of Juda

\[1 Kings 13:1\], who foretold Josiah to King Jeroboam and was torn by
the lion. Yes, even Satan often predicts future things from the nature
of the causes he sees. But this gift, which is promised here, is such
that it certainly brings with it eternal life, which is why it is so
gloriously praised. For what are all other gifts compared to this, that
God\'s Spirit Himself, the eternal God, descends into our hearts, even
into our bodies, and dwells in us, governing and guiding us, as Paul
clearly says, 1 Cor. 6:19: \"Know ye not that your body is a temple of
the Holy Ghost which is in you?\" Therefore, as far as the present
passage of the prophet is concerned, prophecy, vision and dreams are one
and the same, namely the knowledge of God through Christ, which the Holy
Spirit kindles through the word of the Gospel.

**V. 3. 4. and will give miraculous signs in heaven and on earth, namely
blood, fire and smoke vapor. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and
the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord
come.**

About these signs many things are said, when they happened, whether they
preceded the glorification of Christ, or whether they were the signs
that preceded the destruction of the Jewish people; some refer them to
the signs of the last day, since the day before which they are to
precede is called a great and terrible day. But we follow most surely
the certain instruction of the apostle \[Acts 2:16 ff\], who not only
states what Joel foretold about the sending of the Holy Spirit, but also
names these same signs, indicating that these signs occurred before the
sending of the Holy Spirit.

But here a twofold question arises: the first, what are these signs? the
second, why is the day of the sending of the Holy Spirit called a
terrible one, since it is rather full of joy and blessedness? With
regard to the first, I answer that I fully believe that these signs
mentioned by Joel are the same as those mentioned by the evangelists as
having occurred during the day of the sending of the Holy Spirit.

1594 L. XXV, 248-250. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2340-2343.
1595

of the suffering of our Savior. There was a terrible darkness of the sun
just on the day of the full moon, which shrouded everything in darkness,
as if a smoke stretching far and wide hindered the eyes, so that even
what was nearby could not be seen. And the prophet himself interprets in
this way, as he adds that the sun will be darkened and the moon will
give a bloody glow. But, you will say, the evangelists did not mention
anything about the moon, and it was underground during the time that it
could not be seen. I answer: At night it was seen completely, and what
wonder if sad signs also appeared at it, as at the sun, because one must
believe the prophet, who assures this, although the evangelists have
mentioned nothing of the moon. But they have thought of the earthquake
and the opening of the graves, which Joel indicates when he speaks of
the miraculous signs on earth. Some point to the fiery color of the sun,
which it sometimes assumes, as we have seen in this forty-seventh year
for three whole days before the most noble Elector of Saxony was
captured by Emperor Carl in battle. And many are of the opinion that in
this way the future tribulation of the church is indicated, which
towards the end of the world shall be plagued with various kinds of
persecutions, as Christ \[Matth. 24, 21.\] testifies. Others, like
Jerome, interpret it from the fiery tongues or the brilliant flames on
the day of Pentecost, through which the Holy Spirit manifested Himself.
So also John \[Luc. 3, 16.\] predicts that Christ would baptize with
fire. Those who reject this opinion, because this happened in a private
house and not publicly, may seek a more suitable interpretation, if only
the prophet is not deprived of his reputation, that among those signs
there was also fire, not an ordinary but a miraculous one.

But this above all is worthy of interpretation: If these signs preceded
the day of the Lord, on which Christ began to be known to the world
through the sending of the Holy Spirit and the preaching of the gospel
on the day of Pentecost, why is this so joyful day called a terrible
one? Because it is not, as

through the law, the wrath of God has been revealed, but grace and mercy
through the gospel, and those unspeakable treasures have been brought to
us, the forgiveness of sins, righteousness, deliverance from the tyranny
of the devil with the certain hope of eternal bliss. Is this then
terrible? Should we not rather ask for it with the most heartfelt
prayers?

I answer: This day is called dreadful and terrible, not for the sake of
the faithful, to whom it is, as Isaiah Cap. 49, 8, it is in truth \"a
gracious time and a day of salvation,\" and, as Joel says, \"a great
day,\" in which God has revealed the greatness of His power and mercy
against the whole human race, but because of those who do not believe
and because of Satan. For to these it is the day of eternal judgment and
never-ending damnation, as Christ says \[Marc. 16, 16.\]: \"He who does
not believe will be damned.\" Likewise \[Joh. 12, 48.\]: My word will
judge those who do not believe. For just as those who believe in Christ
receive forgiveness of sins, so those who do not believe will have their
sins retained.

**V. 5 And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved. For in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem
there shall be salvation, as the LORD hath promised; even to the rest
whom the LORD shall call.**

The prophet has spoken of the terrible day when the wrath of God will be
revealed from heaven against all ungodly beings. But here 1) he promises
salvation or escape, not a physical one, but from eternal wrath. The
word is very significant. Paul interprets it Rom. 10, 13. by \"to be
saved\". But it includes the present and great danger. For as when a
battle is fought, and the victor with the sword rages far and wide, and
he who escapes in such great danger is called, so the 124th Psalm, v. 7,
uses the similitude of a little bird, which, when the rope is tied
against him, is called \"blessed.

1\) Wittenberger: Uane instead of: Uie.

1596 **L xxv.Wo-252.** leauna of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, 5. W. vr.
**2343-2346.** 1597

waiting is torn, escapes and is saved. This bird is also called as if
you were to say: That comes from it, that is snatched out, that is
saved. The Psalm uses this word twice. Thus, since the prophet says in
this place, \"He that shall be saved,\" he indicates the danger common
to all. For the Holy Spirit punishes the world because of sin \[John
16:8\]. And as Paul says \[Rom. 1, 18.\], \"God\'s wrath from heaven is
revealed against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who hold out
the truth in unrighteousness.\" And yet the prophet promises that it
will happen that some will escape this danger of eternal damnation and
will be saved by calling.

This is truly a great promise, which should stimulate our hearts to
diligent study \[of the Holy Scriptures\]. For what are other arts or
sciences compared to this one, which teaches how to escape eternal death
and the judgment of God? Others serve to gain either reputation or
wealth, and to make this bodily life all the more comfortable, but this
one brings eternal goods with it, and it alone makes this life, which is
otherwise harsh and exceedingly full of dangers, pleasant. For what can
happen to us in this life that is so sad that it would not be alleviated
by the certain hope of the forgiveness of sins and eternal life? But
this art has innumerable masters. For what heathen could you find,
indeed what man could you find, who would not dream that he had a
certain knowledge of this supreme good? The Turks hope that if they
combine the precepts of the Alkoran with outward discipline, they will
attain eternal bliss. The Jews promise themselves bliss if they are
circumcised and keep what is commanded by Moses. A papal minister draws
from the mass, a monk from his vows and his rule, the hope of grace and
eternal life. Finally, the common people, who are instructed by the
papists, have a thousand ways of worship from which they draw the hope
of beatitude.

But all these are miserably mistaken, and while they think they are on
the way to salvation, they are plunged straight into ruin.

For only compare those opinions with the saying of Joel. He promises
salvation, not from bodily dangers, but from death and sins, and yet he
does not think of any legal service or work. Holy and divine
commandments are that one should honor parents, not kill, not break
marital fidelity, guard against theft 2c., and yet Joel remembers none
of these things. Now although these are holy and good works, for they
are commanded by God, they do not serve to save us from death and sins.
There is only one true and certain way to escape, as Joel clearly says,
namely, to worship the name of the Lord; those who do so shall be saved.
All the others, whatever divine services, whatever works they may
perform, cannot be saved if this invocation is not there, but remain and
perish in death and in their sins. The Jew is not saved by the diligent
observance of the law, a papist is not saved by the diligently chosen
services, but only the calling saves.

But you must not think that calling is the mere calling of the name of
God, for if you were to think that, the whole world would be full of
people calling on the name of the Lord. You cannot find a Jew, a Turk,
or a monk who does not call upon it often and earnestly, especially when
they are in danger. But however this may be, there is no work among all
works that is more rare than right invocation. In order for this to be
understood, the right description must be sought. But you cannot get it
from the schools of the sophists. You must consult Paul as a credible
witness, who cites this saying of the prophet and also interprets it
well. Rom. 10, 12-15, he says: \"There is no difference here between
Jews and Greeks; there is only one Lord, rich above all who call on him.
For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But
how shall they call upon him in whom they believe not? And how shall
they believe, of whom they have not heard? But how shall they hear
without a preacher? But how shall they preach where they are not sent?

1598 L. XXV, 252-254. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 234S-234S.
1599

As it is written: \"How beautiful are the feet of those who proclaim
peace, who proclaim good\" 2c. This is a very beautiful and skillful
interpretation of this saying, in which Paul indicates what the right
calling is, to which Joel attributes salvation from death and sins.

Someone who is inexperienced in holy things might think that calling is
a work of the second commandment, and might wonder why blessedness is
attributed to this work of the second commandment and not rather either
to the first commandment, which demands faith and fear, or to all ten
commandments. But Paul answers masterfully that calling comes from
faith, but faith from the word, and gives this description of calling:
\"Calling on the name of the Lord is when you first hear the gospel of
the Son of God and accept the promise in true faith, and then, trusting
in the promise made in the gospel, call on God to protect and save you
for Christ\'s sake against sin, death and the devil. Whoever calls in
this way calls rightly and will surely be saved.

Therefore, calling is not a mere calling of the name of the Lord, which
is also done by the Turks, Jews and Papists; it comprehends the far
highest things, that you hear the gospel with a humble heart, and first
of all do not neglect baptism, then also the holy supper. \[For since
the promise of the gospel is connected with them, they cannot be
neglected or despised without danger of salvation, and that I may say
more clearly what I mean) faith absolutely cannot exist without these.
For faith is based on the Word, but the Word of the forgiveness of sins
God has, as it were, enclosed in these mysteries, namely in Baptism and
the Lord\'s Supper. Baptism has the promise \[Marc. 16, 16.\]: \"Whoever
believes and is baptized will be saved.\" The Lord\'s Supper has this
promise, that the body of Christ is given for us, and his blood for the
forgiveness of our sins.

1\) Instead of: \<2uoä äicÄw \[sntil) in the Wittenberg and in the
Erlangen is to be read with the Jena: yuoä \[satio üieuw.

sins are poured out. With this promise, the very things of which the
promise speaks are presented to us, namely the body and blood of Christ
with the bread and wine, so that hearts may be all the more firmly
founded on the promise. Therefore, those who teach that only bread and
wine are served in the Lord\'s Supper are acting in a nefarious manner.
This is the first thing that calling requires, that you hear the word
and use the sacraments. Therefore, how can Turks and Jews call upon God
who do not have the Word and ridicule the Sacraments? How can the
Papists invoke God, who even persecute the Word and condemn the proper
use of the Sacraments?

But it is not enough to hear the word and use the sacraments; the word
must be heard in faith, and the sacraments must be received in faith.
But faith is the certain confidence in which we firmly believe that God
is reconciled through Christ, forgives us our sins by grace and accepts
us as children and heirs of eternal life. Since the papists do not know
this faith at all (for believing means nothing else to them than
confessing or knowing history), how can they call upon the name of the
Lord?

The third part is that the heart that trusts in the mercy of God opens
and asks for salvation with a lively voice and fervent prayers. The
conditions of right invocation, that I say so, show, when considered
properly, that no worship is rarer than right invocation, and that it is
found only in the true Church. The name of God is indeed invoked by all,
but others, as the Turks, lack the word and the sacraments. Others, as
the Papists, monkey about and persecute the Word, but they use the
Sacraments without faith, as if they benefited those who use them by the
mere performance of the work\". Therefore it is certain that neither of
them call upon the name of the Lord, but rather that they uselessly lead
and profane it, as in the 109th Psalm, v. 7. is said by the persecutors,
the Jews: \"Let their prayer be sin.\" For

1600 L. **XXV, 254-256.** interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 5-8. W.
**VI, 2349-2356.** 1601

Just as those who call on the name of the Lord in the right way are
saved and experience the eternal fruit of prayer, so those who call on
it without faith palliate their sin and hasten their destruction.

But why does the prophet not content himself with saying: Who will call
upon the Lord? Why does he add: \"Who will call on the name of the
Lord\", or as it is said in Hebrew: \"In the name of the Lord\"? Of
course, we must note that this was not done by chance, but with a
certain intention. The name is generally taken for the recognition by
which we recognize others. For by the mark of the name both men and all
things are distinguished from one another. When you hear the name Paul,
you recognize that it is another teacher than Augustine or Jerome was.
Thus the name of the Lord is nothing other than the Word itself, for
through the Word God has revealed Himself, and through the Word we begin
to know God, as it were, whom, if He were without the Word, we could
never have known, as John says \[John 1:18\]: \"No one has ever seen
God. The Son who is in the bosom of the Father, He has declared it to
us.\" Therefore, to call in the name of the LORD or \"to call upon the
name of the LORD\" is to call upon GOD in confidence in the promise
which the Son of GOD has brought to us from heaven. Therefore He is also
called λόγος or \"the Word,\" likewise the image of God, because God
revealed Himself in Christ, what kind of disposition He has toward us,
that He does not (as He is depicted in the Law) hate us, but loves us
and wants to make us, who are freed from sins through the Son, blessed.
For this reason he sends his Son.

The expression \[\"who\"\] encompassing all people must not be
overlooked here, because it was the main reason for Paul to quote this
passage. Because he says \[Rom. 10, 12\] that there is no difference
between Gentiles and Jews, since God is rich over all who call upon Him,
he used the testimony of the prophet very appropriately. It is known,
however, that as often as the calling of the Gentiles is spoken of, the
mercy of God is praised.

takes away the charge and the burden of the law, and deals with us by
grace, not according to our merit.

He remembers Mount Zion to indicate the place where this joyful voice of
grace or the gospel will first resound. But we have said elsewhere why
the prophets, when they speak of the kingdom of Christ, mention rather
Mount Zion than the temple. For the temple with its services was to be
taken down after the sacrifice of the Son of God. But Zion was David\'s
castle. Since Christ is his Son, he must have this seat of his Father
and rule in this nation, but in such a way that his kingdom is not of
this world, and Mount Zion fills the whole world, Isaiah 2:3 ff. Since
the Jews do not know this, they cannot understand any promise correctly
and, as the prophet clearly teaches here, cannot attain to righteousness
and blessedness. For from this passage it is certain that apart from the
church there is no salvation, which must be remembered against the trust
in works and the presumption in human powers.

**Also with the others whom the Lord will call.**

This piece should have been connected with the following. For here
begins the prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, so we will explain
it soon after.

**For, behold, in those days, and at that time, when I shall turn the
captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, I will gather all the nations
together, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and
there will I make terms with them for my people, and for my inheritance
of Israel, which they have scattered among the nations, and have divided
themselves into my land, and have cast lots for my people, and have
given the children for meat, and sold the maidens for wine, and made
them drunk**.

This passage has been more obscured than explained by all interpreters,
at least by those whose writings are available. Of the Jews I say
nothing, who, because the prophet of the Thales Josaphat remembers, this
passage on the

16022 XXV, 256-2S9. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2356-23S9.
1603

History 2 Chron. 20. But ours refer everything to the desolation of the
synagogue or to the last day. But it is easy for the reader to see that
what they say is neither consistent nor appropriate. And indeed, they
themselves indicate what prevented them from recognizing the truth. For
all of them fail at the same cliff, and understand it in such a way that
the Gentiles are to be gathered together for judgment. And indeed, the
word judgment is more terrifying to us than to the Hebrews. But because
the exceedingly sad pictures are added, of the selling of the Gentiles,
of the seizing of the sickles, because wickedness has got the upper
hand, all fall into the opinion that they understand the prophet 1) of
the judgment of wrath, although they differ as to the time, since some
interpret the judgment from the desolation done by the Romans, others
from the last day.

But to the one who looks carefully at the prophet, the order of the text
itself indicates the right opinion. For after the prophet has said that
salvation will be in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, he mentions some
others who will be saved, even though they are not in Mount Zion and in
Jerusalem. He says: \"Also with the rest, whom the Lord will call\",
there will be salvation. Here it is first of all clear that those whom
he calls the others are distinguished from the Zionites or the Jews,
also according to the calling. For to the Jews the promise had come from
the seed. But just as in the parable of the Gospel \[Luc. 14:16 ff\],
when the Jews refuse to come to the wedding and the supper, the servant
is sent by a new command to those who dwelt outside the city by the
highways, so here the prophet says that the Lord will also call others
besides the church, that they may be gathered to the church and also be
saved. So this piece undoubtedly refers to the flocks.

But what the prophet adds: \"For behold, in the days,\" 2c., is, as it
were, a brief explanation of this saying of the calling

1\) Wittenberger: propüstinra instead of: propNetam.

of the Gentiles. For he shows how and at what time this calling of the
Gentiles is to be expected. So you see that the whole sense is connected
nicely, if you refer this whole prophecy to the judgment of grace, not
to the judgment of wrath. For expressly he says that the Gentiles are to
be called into the valley to the judgment of the LORD, for this is what
the word \"Jehoshaphat\" means, which in this place does not stand as a
proper name, but has an appellative meaning. For the judgment of men is
that their sins must be followed by their punishments. This is taught
not only by the law of Moses, but also by reason itself. But the
judgment of the Lord is different, who judges through his gospel and for
Christ\'s sake forgives the sins of believers and gives them the Holy
Spirit and eternal life. This is the judgment of the Lord, of which the
prophet preaches most sweetly in this passage. First, he remembers the
sins of the Gentiles, then he adds the punishment that they will be sold
again by the Jews to those of Sheba. Third, he exhorts the teachers of
the church to work diligently in the vineyard of the Lord as in a ripe
harvest. Finally, he adds exceedingly rich promises with which he
comforts the church, which in this life is subject to the cross (for he
remembers the blood). In this way the whole order of the discourse
agrees very well, which both the old and the newer interpreters have
made so obscure that it is impossible for him who follows them to obtain
the right sense. But now let us explain the text in order.

\"The turning of the prison of Judah and Jerusalem\" is nothing other
than the teaching of the Gospel, which brings to us forgiveness of sins,
righteousness and eternal life. For before the knowledge of the gospel,
we are held under the tyranny of the devil and death for the sake of
sins, and there is no power in us at all by which we could endure or
completely remove these great evils, but our hearts are constantly
tormented by the fear of the wrath and judgment of God. The gospel,
however, is the right remedy by which this evil is lifted.

1604 **L- XXV, 259-261.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, 6-8. **W.
VI, 2S5O-2S62.** 1605

For it holds up to us the Son of God, who suffers the punishments of our
sins, and shows that God loves us for the sake of this sacrifice; yes,
it gives us the Holy Spirit, who kindles faith in hearts and in this way
purifies and sanctifies us. For through faith sins are forgiven, and the
Spirit awakens our hearts not to yield themselves as servants to sin,
but to rule over it and put to death the flesh. In this way the
captivity is turned. For though the devil never ceases to tempt us, he
cannot compel us as a ruler or lord; the Spirit of God in us resists his
efforts; though we sometimes fall from weakness, yet through repentance
and faith in Christ we raise ourselves up again, that we perish not in
sins.

When this begins with the Jews through the teaching of the Gospel, that
they are free from the tyranny of the devil, sin and death through the
Son of God, who became a sacrifice for us, then, he says, I will gather
all the Gentiles together and lead them down into the valley to the
judgment of the Lord. The Valley of Jehoshaphat is very famous, even
among the ancient interpreters who claim that it is the place of the
Last Judgment. But, as I said above, the order of things, which the
prophet holds, shows another. The prophet wanted to use the name
\"valley\" because a valley is unsuitable for those who fight in the
battle line. For fighting is better in open areas, where the line of
battle can be unfolded, while troops crowded into a narrow place are not
only useless, but also hinder each other. A valley, therefore, denotes a
place inconvenient and unsuitable for a large crowd, and serves to
illustrate the pain and anguish of the conscience, which sees its
unworthiness and its sins. When the Gentiles are pressed into this
valley, that is, when the Holy Spirit through the Gospel punishes the
world for sin, for righteousness and for judgment, when the hearts feel
the burden of sin, when they despair of their righteousness and cannot
protect themselves against the judgment of God: then, says the prophet,

the Lord will judge, not with the judgment of wrath, by which sins are
condemned, but of grace, by which sins are forgiven. For the gospel
comforts the so terrified minds, that the Son of God became the
sacrifice for sins, and by his death reconciled the Father with us 2c.

But what are the causes or merits of this great good deed? Absolutely
none, but rather enormous debts, which should be followed by eternal
death. But the kind and merciful God does not want the death of the
sinner, but that he converts and lives \[Ezek. 33, 11\]. But the prophet
remembers the sins of the Gentiles, that they scattered the people of
God, that they divided the land of God among themselves, that they sold
the boys for food and the maidens for wine. First of all, notice the
pronoun: [my]{.underline} people, my land. For this people was God\'s
own, who alone had the revelations, the promises and the worship. And
yet the Lord suffered that this people of his was led away and his land
taken. Why is that? Because they had sinned by despising the Word and
the prophets. This is the foremost cause of great empires being
disrupted and overthrown. Therefore, we cannot be surprised that today
Germany is also moved by unusual unrest. We who hold fast the gospel do
not live in such a way that we cannot fear punishment. For, to say
nothing of the other sins, how great is the ingratitude of all against
the ministers of the Word, how great the contempt! But how can God
tolerate any longer the frightening obstinacy of the bishops who insist
on idolatry? Therefore, reminded by the example of the people of GOD, we
are to learn to bear this misfortune patiently, and we are to cut off
the penalties of so great sins by careful correction of our lives. For
if, as the prophet says, we are sorry for our sins, then the Lord will
also be sorry for the punishment he has decided to inflict.

But that he says of the selling of the boys for food and the maidens for
wine,

1606 xxv, 261-263. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2362-2366.
1607

is an excellent picture by which he depicts the raging of the
adversaries of the church, as if you would say today that the papists
are so inflamed with hatred against us that they would have no
hesitation in strangling a confessor of the gospel for a drink of wine.
So nothing was more pleasant, nothing easier, for the Gentiles than to
draw the sword against the Jews. Such bitter hatred does not originate
in the hearts of men, but is instilled by Satan.

V.9-11. **And you of Zor and Zidon, and all the border of the
Philistines, what have you to do with me? Will you defy me? If you defy
me, I will quickly repay you on your head. Ye that have taken my silver,
and my gold, and my goodly jewels, and have brought them into your
churches, and have sold the children of Judah and the children of
Jerusalem unto the Grecians, that ye might bring them far from their
borders.**

The prophet spoke of the Gentiles, by whom Israel is desolate; here he
speaks of the neighbors and reproaches them for the injustice done to
his people, for they plucked the Jews as opportunity offered and plagued
them in many ways. He mentions two misfortunes: that they robbed the
Jews of their silver, gold and other valuables, with which they then
adorned their idols; and that they sold the Jews to the Greeks, so that
they might cut off all hope of return for those who had gone far away.
This, says the Lord, you have done to me without any just cause, since
you were not induced or provoked by my people. Therefore, I will repay
you, not in the way that angry people do, who repay evil with evil, but
in my way. For you are gathered for the judgment of the Lord. Therefore
I will not repay you evil, but will do good for evil, and will also sell
you through mine, not to rough and ineffective places, but I will make
you citizens of the kingdom of Arabia 2c.

Therefore, this chapter is nothing other than a praise of the glorious
grace, although it is

is presented somewhat darkly. For this honor had to be reserved for the
Son of God, that he taught the church clearly and distinctly about the
mercy of the eternal Father. Therefore, the excellent parables that are
told in the history of the Gospels about the Son of God, such as the
father of the house \[Luc. 14, 16. ff.\], of the king who invites all
without distinction to the banquet and the wedding \[Matth. 22, 1.
ff.\], of the shepherd who searches for the lost sheep \[Luc. 15, 4.
ff.\], of the rich man who forgave his servant the debt of ten thousand
pounds \[Matth. 18, 23. ff.\], of the usurer who forgave all their debts
\[Luc. 7, 41. ff.\], of the householder who gave equal wages to those
who did unequal work \[Matth. 20, 1. ff.\], and other such things by
which the grace of God is praised, who forgives our sins for the sake of
His Son and adopts us as His children.

And here the cause of the obscurity comes to light, which, as I have
said before, has misled almost all interpreters. The name judgment is
terrifying, and since in this passage the sins committed by the Gentiles
are expressly thought of, reason cannot conclude otherwise than that
certain punishments will follow, and the examples show that God has
always inflicted severe punishments on the enemies of the Church, as in
regard to the commonwealths which the prophet here remembers, hard
prophecies are present in Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel. And truly, the
judgment of the law is not in vain, which extends its threats even to
the third and fourth member. Also the parable is known \[Matth. 18, 23.
ff.\], in which the householder threatens the servant, who owed him ten
thousand pounds, that he, his wife, his children and everything he owned
should be sold. On this opinion of the law the interpreters have also
drawn this present text, but they have erred by not observing the
difference of the law and the gospel. The law indicates what God demands
and threatens the transgressors with punishment. The gospel, however, is
the doctrine of grace, which teaches about the works that the Son of God
took upon himself.

1608 L..xLv-.NW\^sss. Interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 9-11. **W.**
vi, **2366-2369.** 1609

and accomplished, and promises forgiveness of sins to those who believe
in him.

Therefore, the judgment of God is twofold; one of the law, which God has
exercised from the creation of the world and will exercise until the end
of the world against the impenitent, that He will punish certain sins
with certain punishments. But also in the Church this judgment is seen,
as Peter says \[1 Ep. 4, 17.\]: \"The judgment begins at the house of
GOD.\" For even for the saints, with so great a weakness of the flesh, a
certain severity is necessary, both that licentiousness may be kept in
check and that they may not safely persist in sins. This is how David\'s
adultery was punished. The prophet does not speak of this judgment in
this passage. For he has the preaching of the gospel before him, and
speaks of a judgment other than that of the law. For through the gospel
sin is indeed accused, but to those who believe in Christ it is
remitted, and this because without the forgiveness of sins the kingdom
of God cannot exist. For God either cannot have a church, or it is
necessary for Him to forgive sin. For our whole nature is so corrupted
by sin that if God did not heal it through the forgiveness of sins, it
could not see the Kingdom of God. Since the voice of the Gospel
resounds, the world is judged in such a way that the sins of the
believers are forgiven by the Son of God. In the meantime, the judgment
of the law also takes place, so that the secure hearts are bowed and
humbled, and they also accept grace all the more eagerly. So also the
terrible sentence of the father of the house, that the servant is to be
sold and all that he has, forces him to ask for mitigation of the
punishment \[Matth. 18, 26.\]: \"Have patience with me,\" he says, \"I
will pay you everything.\" Thus the purpose of all the punishments which
God inflicts is that those who recognize their sins may mend their ways
and take refuge in the mercy of God. And in Isaiah, the Lord complains
greatly about the stubbornness of the synagogue, that it cannot even be
cured by blows, but only becomes more stubborn by acts of kindness.

As for Joel, he remembers the sins of the Gentiles and says that the
Lord will judge, but it will not be a judgment of the law, but of the
gospel, that is, it will not condemn because of sins, but will absolve
believers from sins and eternal punishments, so that he may also
establish a church among the Gentiles, but we will explain this more
clearly below.

But I have said above that here a picture of the church is held up,
which is plundered by the pagans and the neighbors. And truly a great
and extraordinary contempt is shown, since he says that the boys are
sold for food and the maidens for wine, as if you would say today that
we are so hated by the papists that they would as soon strangle us as
drink a cup of wine. But of the neighbors he says that they have robbed
the gold and silver, and that with this booty the temples of the
Gentiles have been adorned. This is also the sin of the papists, for
they have extorted from their own gold and all that was precious, and
have adorned their idols with it. For these goods should have been used
to feed the poor, to maintain the high schools and to establish common
schools, but they have served to cultivate indulgence and pleasure, and
still serve for this purpose today, but not only that, but they are also
used to adorn idolatry and to destroy godliness. But we are to be
mindful that God will repay them, and not as is said here of Zor and
Zidon, for that was a repayment in grace. The Lord has offered this to
our adversaries for many years through His Word, but without any fruit,
because they persist in hating the Word and true godliness. Therefore,
only the retribution of the law remains, as Zor and Zidon suffered
before the time of the announcement of the Gospel. Tyre is especially
praised in Ezekiel \[Cap. 26 ff.\] for its power, but it failed to
withstand the deserved punishments; it perished, and miserably, so that
it suffered a whole seven-

1610 L. XXV, 265-267. interpretations on the prophets. W. Vl. 2369-2872.
1611

lay desolate for tens of years. But a harder fate awaits the papists.

V.12. 13. **Behold, I will raise them up out of the place whither ye
sold them, and will recompense you upon your head. And I will sell your
sons and your daughters again by the children of Judah; and they shall
sell them unto them that are in the kingdom of Arabia unto a people of a
far country: for the LORD hath spoken it.**

Here he interprets the judgment of which he said above. But I have
reminded that the prophet must not be understood of the legal
retribution or that which we men are wont to use among ourselves when we
inflict on sins the punishments due to them, but of the retribution of
the gospel or grace, according to which sins are forgiven and the Holy
Spirit is given. And to prove that this opinion is true, no one with
understanding will deny that the children of Judah, of whom Joel speaks
here, are the true church, which began in the people of God through the
gospel of Christ, and received the gift of the Holy Spirit. It is
obvious, however, that the church will not rage against its enemies with
any bodily violence, but that it will rather suffer unjust violence in
this life. Therefore, what Joel says about the Gentiles who are to be
sold by the children of Judah is quite figurative. For just as one who
has been sold is no longer powerful, but depends entirely on the
judgment and will of the buyer, so, he indicates, the Gentiles would
leave idolatry and serve the true God. This, however, is not a
punishment of servitude, but an exceedingly high gift, for it brings
with it eternal life.

And for this speaks, according to my opinion, that he says, the Gentiles
shall be sold to those in Imperial Arabia; for Saba 1) or happy Arabia
is preferred to all countries of the whole earth. Hence it is called the
happy \[Arabia\] both among the Greeks and the Latins. The Hebrew name
Saba also denotes abundance.

1\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: 8ad \"6 instead: Lada in the Jena.

and abundance. Therefore, when he says that the Greeks will be sold to
those in Saba, that is, transferred to the most abundant land, who can
take this as a punishment and not rather as a very great blessing? The
passage in Isaiah, Cap. 60, 6, also serves this purpose, in which he
prophesies that all from Saba will come to the church, bringing gifts of
gold and incense, and proclaiming the praises of the Lord. For the
prophets not infrequently look to the images of nature in their sermons.
Soon after, when Joel will preach about the gifts of the church, he will
promise mountains dripping with wine and hills flowing with milk, that
is, exceedingly productive pastures, and mountains bearing much wine.
Now since those of Sheba, above all the peoples of the whole earth, are
endowed by God with the best gold and incense, these symbols pleased the
prophets, and they made Sheba the image of the Church, in which alone is
found gold, that is, the word and faith (for these are joined and cannot
in any way be separated), and incense, that is, calling. For how shall
they call, in whom they believe not? and how shall they believe without
the preaching? \[These, therefore, are the chief and peculiar gifts of
the Sabaites, that is, of the church. For though there is no nation that
does not boast of some religion and worship, yet true faith and right
calling is nowhere but in the church. All other nations are without
faith and live in idolatry, but they do not know how to call, as we said
above.

This, what we have said about the opinion of the prophet, is certain.
But it is not necessary to pass over the consolation here, which is most
necessary, especially at this time. He said that the Jews had been sold
to the Greeks into a far country, so that all hope of return would be
cut off. Therefore, if you look at the hearts of those who have been
sold to the Greeks, you will see that they are not only troubled by fear
and sorrow, but that they are also in despair for themselves and their
descendants. For what should they hope among heathen dwelling so far
away, where there is no worship?

[1612 L. XXV, SS7-SSS. Interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 12-17. W,
VI, W7L-W7S. 1613]{.underline}

is no knowledge of God, no word of God? Think of yourself: if you were
taken away to Turkey today with your own, what hope could you have for
yourself and your descendants? But one must not measure these dangers
according to our judgment, but God\'s power must be considered and the
promises of God, which, although the church is plagued in many ways in
this life, nevertheless give rise to the hope that it will triumph and
that its enemies will perish completely. Thus you hear in this passage
that the children of Judah are sold to the Gentiles, but they are
brought together again from the Gentiles and rule over the victors, that
is, they become teachers of the Gentiles, they draw the Gentiles away
from the ungodly nature to the knowledge of God, and make those of Sheba
rich in truth in every kind of spiritual good.

But we are to believe that this comfort is a general one. For it is true
what Paul says \[Rom. 8, 28. 35.\], that all things serve the elect for
the best, and that neither hunger nor sword can separate us from the
love of God, that is, that God loves us for the sake of His Son, even
when sword and hunger oppress us. But this love is necessarily followed
by victory, as Paul adds \[v. 38\]: \"In all this we overcome far\"
*(ύπερναώμεν*). But only take care that you remain in the church and in
the people of God, that is, keep the word and the faith, and it will
happen that, although you suffer tribulation, yet the tribulation will
go out to you for the best. But those who reject the faith, what wonder
is it that they are forsaken in calamity? as Isaiah \[Cap. 7, 9.\]
threatens Ahaz, \"If ye believe not, ye abide not.\" Daniel was not only
in a very high position in the Babylonian captivity, but also
accomplished very great things and became the cause of salvation for
very many. Therefore, you must think that this is always connected:
tribulation and comfort, humiliation and exaltation, death and life.
Therefore, if you suffer tribulation, do not despair, for you are close
to glory and will triumph happily if you only remain in faith.

**V. 14-17. Proclaim this among the nations; sanctify a war; awaken the
strong; let all the men of war come and go up; make your plowshares into
swords and your sickles into spears; let the weak man speak: I am
strong. Redden yourselves, and come hither, all ye heathen round about,
and gather yourselves together. There the LORD will lay low your strong
ones. The nations shall make themselves ready, and come forth to the
valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the nations
round about.**

Again and again we must look at the main thing, what the prophet intends
to do. Because the whole speech is figurative, he who does not look more
often at the thing he has undertaken or at the goal he has in mind will
easily stray from the right opinion. But the prophet presented the
promise of the outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the holy remnant. Then
he added another prophecy about the calling of the Gentiles, which he
wrapped in a mystery, as it were. For he says that the Gentiles will be
called into a valley where the Lord will judge and repay them for what
they have done to God\'s people, for the Gentiles will also be sold to
those in Sheba, to a distant people.

Now he adds the exhortation to the Gentiles that they should prepare
themselves for this battle. He summarizes two things: first, he shows
with what fury the world opposes the gospel; second, he teaches that the
attacks of the world are in vain. Because the devil\'s kingdom is
attacked by the gospel, he gathers all the power he can to defend his
own. And it is not necessary to cite examples from ancient times to show
what dangers he has always put God\'s people in, what attacks he has
carried out in the last days. What plots he has made in the last
monarchy \[Dan. 7, 7.\] to destroy the church of the New Testament; we
want to look at the present times. For what have the popes not tried
against the teaching of the Gospel for the last twenty-eight years? what
the monks, what the high schools, yes, what the kings and princes? The

1614 L. XXV. 269-271. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2S7S-2878.
1615

Godly teachers and the confessors of the holy word have everywhere been
robbed of their goods, banished, killed, the books burned, the sermons
forbidden, the testament of Christ violated and the use of the holy
communion perverted; other, godless ceremonies have been imposed for
profit, even terrible mandates have been issued against our teaching.
Since in this way they only hindered the course of the Gospel among
their own, they finally also took counsel to suppress our churches by
force of arms.

This is what the prophet says in this passage: \"Awaken the strong, make
your plowshares into swords and your sickles into spears,\" that is, let
the care for war be more important to you than the reaping of the seed
and the plowing of the land. Let no one be weak, but let him who is weak
say that he is strong, that is, even those who are unskilled in warfare
should nevertheless wage war, just as today the soft and effeminate
crowd of bishops, canons and monks not only desire war, but also go to
war. This is the first thing that the prophet indicates in this passage,
and it is useful that such descriptions of such tremendous rage and
hatred exist, for they strengthen the hearts of the godly so that they
do not give up hope, as if it were an unusual thing, since Satan has
raged in this way at all times; but with what happiness and with what
success?

This is the second thing that the prophet indicates here. For this
summons contains a bitter mockery, for it indicates that all the
endeavors and efforts of Satan and the world will be in vain, as the
prophet further adds: \"There the LORD will lay thy strong ones low.\"
Thus in the second Psalm there are terrifying things which the Holy
Spirit says of the kings, princes, nations, and heathen who conspire,
and gather together both their power and their counsel, to break the
bands with which the Lord seeks, as it were, to bind the pretensions of
the flesh. For the gospel punishes the world, that it may cease from
sin, and pursue righteousness, and shake off the yoke of Satan, because
he hath judged it.

is not. But the world rejoices in sins and stubbornly cherishes the
idolatrous nature and puts all its forces into suppressing the wholesome
teaching. This undertaking does not go off without murder and bloodshed
of the godly, and yet the godless do not execute what they want. For he
who is in heaven does not immediately punish the raging of the wicked,
but lets them progress and be happy to a certain extent, but he still
laughs at their foolish and futile efforts. For what is it that a man
seeks to hinder or overthrow God\'s counsels, who is in heaven, and with
one wave shatters the whole world? But he does not always laugh, he also
speaks in his anger, that is, he repels the wicked, and not only
disturbs their counsels, but also corrupts them completely.

This end is also indicated by the prophet here. But because we are only
concerned about the present and do not measure future events according
to the word but according to our senses, the flesh trembles and either
doubts the success or becomes completely discouraged by the fear of
future misfortune. Therefore, we must look to the word and constantly
have the examples of past times before our eyes, which all testify with
one voice, as it were, that the world rages against the word, but
finally falls away in the midst of its pretensions, but the word of the
Lord remains forever.

Therefore, the LORD says here: \"Come hither, all ye Gentiles round
about, 1) and gather yourselves together. There the LORD will lay low
your strong ones.\" Here, however, special attention must be paid to the
word XXXXXX \[\"strong ones\"), for the enemies of the Gospel are not
despised, weak, poor people, but they are strong ones. That is why the
Church, abandoned by carnal help, is in danger and afraid. Today we are
not a little moved by the wealth, the power, the skill, the warfare of
the adversaries, and realize that we are no match for them. But why are
we moved? Is this not carnal? But we, who have a Father in heaven, whose
name and honor are in

1\) Erlanger: patrldus instead of: partldns.

1616 **L. XXV, 271-273.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, 14-18.
**W. VI, 2378-2382.** 1617

If we are in danger, should we base ourselves on carnal protection? Let
those do so who do not know about God and persecute the Word. For who
should refuse that they come with chariots and horses? For they have and
know no other help. But we, who have God, will do the work of our
profession according to our ability, and will hope in the name of the
Lord \[Ps. 20:8\]. For this is the work of the LORD, this is his power.
For he does not want to have defenseless adversaries; he wants to put
down the strong; the more certain they are of victory, the more easily
they fall into danger. But, as I have said above, Satan\'s activity does
not go off without all harm. For we offend God in many ways with our
sins. And God is in the habit of starting the judgment at his Hanse. For
our adversaries are fortunate for a time, for our sins deserve this, but
if they do not also repent, if they do not, as it is said in the second
Psalm \[v. 12\], kiss the Son, and allow themselves to be chastened,
that is, humbly speak out, then they must not only be afflicted with
bodily ills, but be cast into hell and suffer eternal fire, as the
saying says (Marc. 16, 16.): \"He who does not believe will be
condemned.\"

Therefore this present passage should serve us for comfort, because it
teaches about the future happy outcome, that the strong shall be put
down, who resist the word. But they are put down in two ways: some are
put down for salvation. For these submit to the word, put away their
sins, flee their habitual idolatry, and are raised up by the hope of
forgiveness through Christ. Thus Paul was laid low at Damascus. But, O
blessed fall, for he was prevented from sinning further, and obtained
forgiveness of sins and the Holy Spirit through faith. And the Lord
draws his sword for this purpose and makes war against the world, so
that those who repent may be saved. But those who either arrogantly
despise the word or hate it and persistently persecute it, they are laid
low by the Lord, not with a salvific snare,

but with a corrupt one, so that they perish forever, like Pharaoh, Saul
2c.

The judgment of the Lord in the valley of judgment is therefore this,
that he punishes sins by the word, and teaches righteousness and
judgment. And good to those who bear and suffer this judgment. For
though the old man is choked and the heart is afflicted with true and
unbearable anguish, yet the Physician of souls, the Son of God, heals
this disease of the heart and brings rest to the mind through the
promise that sin is atoned for and reconciliation is made through Him.
But those who despise the word, even though they live safely for a
while, will still fall into eternal misery.

**V. 18. Strike the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come down, for the
winepress, is full, and the winepress overflows; for their wickedness is
great.**

This is another exhortation, which actually concerns the ministers of
the gospel, through whose service the Lord is waging this war, that they
dare to try their luck in this war with great and unbroken courage,
certain that the outcome will be happy. This exhortation is very
necessary, because it is known what dangers follow the confession (of
the gospel) and this service. See the histories of John, Christ and the
apostles. Do not those who teach faith in Christ, the Son of God, stir
up against themselves the whole kingdom of Satan? Satan is the god and
prince of the world. Just as princes protect themselves and their
subjects with weapons, Satan uses the power of the whole world to
suppress the ministry of preaching. Therefore, those who have the
teaching ministry must have firm and unbending courage, and they must
not be frightened by the wickedness of the world; indeed, the more angry
and desperate the world is, the more courageously they must commit
themselves to the preaching of the gospel, so that at least some may be
\"snatched\" from the jaws of Satan.

The words: \"For their wickedness is great\" actually refer to the time
of Christ. For the world at that time was utterly corrupt, and Satan\'s
raging was without measure, as

1618 L. XXV. L73-2-6. interpretations on the prophets. \' W. VI.
2382-WS4. 1619

The histories and examples of the pagans teach. For how many and various
kinds of idolatry were among all the heathen! Therefore also the poets
have mocked at superstition and idolatry, as he who says that the
Egyptians grow their gods in the gardens. And who should not be
horrified when he reads that the most abominable abominations were held
for divine services? But how great was the blindness even among the
people of God, since some publicly denied the resurrection of the dead
and rejected the writings of the prophets! Therefore, in truth,
wickedness overflowed at that time like a full winepress, and if the
salvific light of the Gospel had not appeared, the whole world would
have perished. Therefore, he exhorts them to confront the rage of Satan
and to heal the falling world with this healing remedy.

**V. 19. 20. Here and there shall be multitudes in the valley of
judgment: for the day of the LORD is near in the valley of judgment. The
sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall not give their
light.**

So far, the prophet has preached with a joyful spirit, but very dark
words, the grace of God and the joyful progress of the Gospel, that it,
spread to all corners of the whole world, nowhere departs without its
fruit. For it judges all without distinction, and this judgment is not
in vain or useless. For those who accept it in faith are freed from the
devil\'s tyranny and await in faith the inheritance of eternal life.
Others who do not believe hear the judgment of death. For what hope of
salvation could be left if Christ and the gospel are rejected? What
follows is not different in spirit, but it is clearer and interprets
what was presented above in a darker way.

He said above that all the Gentiles should be gathered into the valley
of Jehoshaphat \[v. 7\]. This is obscure, for it cannot be known whether
it \[\"Jehoshaphat\"\] is to be taken as a proper name or in an
appellative sense, though the circumstances indicate that not the corner
of the land of Judah but the whole world is so called. This ambiguity
eliminates

The prophet now calls it no longer the valley of Jehoshaphat, but the
valley of XXXX, that is, of judgment, in which the Lord will pronounce a
certain judgment on the whole human race through the gospel, and thus
war against the Gentiles. For the word XXX actually means to pass a
certain and definite judgment. Thus it is said in 1 Kings 20:40: \"This
is your judgment, you have formed it yourself.\" Job 14, 5: \"Man has
his appointed time.\" Likewise Isa. 10, 22. 28, 22. and Dan. 9, 26. 27.
put the same words: The LORD will cause destruction and pass judgment,
that is, he will destroy the unbelieving people. For this is an image
taken from the court system, where what is once decided is not changed.
Paul followed the seventy interpreters in his letter to the Romans Cap.
9, 27. f.. They translated the passage of Isaiah \[Cap. 10, 22.\] with
these words: Verbum abbreviatum faciet Dominus. But there is no reason
why they could translate XXXX 1) by verbum, because it means
\"destruction\" and the end. But abbreviatum is to be understood in this
way: certain, definite, unchangeable, as we speak in German with almost
the same image when we indicate that we will not change anything in our
judgment: \"In short.\" Thus the Septuagint calls consummationem
abbreviatam \[Vulg.\] the certain and firmly decided desolation of the
people. In this way, in this passage, Valley XXX means the Valley of
Judgment, in which the Lord will pass a certain and unchangeable
judgment on all peoples.

But what is this firmly decided judgment? Certainly this \[Marc. 16,
16\]: \"Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved. \[Matth. 17,
5.:\] \"This is my beloved Son, whom you shall hear.\" \[John 3:18:\]
\"He that believeth on him is not judged: but he that believeth not is
judged already.\" This judgment is unchangeable, certain and definite,
that God through His Son will forgive sins and give eternal life. Those
who accept this in faith are blessed, those who do not accept it are
eternally lost.

However, this judgment will not be given to a people.

1\) In the editions: ealsk.

1620 **L. XXV, 276-278.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, 19-21.
**W. VI, 2384-2388.** 1621

The Jews have boasted of the name of the church alone, but, as the
prophet says here, XXXXX XXXXX; peoples are gathered everywhere, crowds
and multitudes everywhere, wherever one turns one\'s eyes to hear this
judgment. But because the world is primarily concerned with either
weakening, or bending, or changing this judgment; for the Jews suffer it
with displeasure that the services of the law are rejected; the papists
hang their stubble and chaff on the merit of Christ, namely their vows,
their fasting, their self-chosen food, and such foolish works: therefore
the prophet calls it a fixed and certain judgment, from which no one can
or should detract, nor to which anyone can or should add anything.

I do not know whether what he adds of the darkening of the sun and the
moon and of the darkening of the stars does not also figuratively
indicate the tremendously large crowd of people. For as one can conclude
from the tumult to some extent the crowd of the people, so also a large
crowd arouses a tremendous dust, which also takes away the sight of the
sun and the sky. I consider this to be the simplest conception. Because
that one refers this to the fear of the souls does not fit at all well
in this place, since the prophet deals primarily with it that he shows,
the kingdom of Christ should be spread under all nations.

V. 21: **And the LORD shall roar out of Zion, and shall cause his voice
to be heard out of Jerusalem, and the heavens and the earth shall be
lifted up.**

Here he explains what kind of judgment this is, to which the Gentiles
are to be gathered and which they oppose with all their strength.
Likewise, what kind of war is this, by which the strong will be defeated
and sold into faraway places. He says he will not use weapons, he will
not fight with lightning like on the Red Sea, but he will let his voice
sound from Zion, not faint or weak, but strong and terrifying, like the
voice of lions, and from Jerusalem he will speak. But although this
repetition may seem idle, it is perfectly suited to the office of the

Evangelii. For as Christ commands \[Luc. 24, 47.\] to teach repentance
and forgiveness of sins in his name, but the doctrine of repentance
punishes sins and terrifies hearts through the fear of the wrath and
judgment of God, so here \"the roaring\" is put in the first place,
which is a symbol of the doctrine of repentance. For the voice of the
lion is the most terrible of all beasts, and he does not let it be heard
unless he is moved by anger. Therefore the Scripture ascribes roaring to
the hungry lion that has obtained prey; in this way the gospel chastises
the world for sin, not only so that the world may learn that it has sin,
since if it were not reminded by the word it would be safe because of
its sins, but it also teaches that there is no help in us against sin,
even that sins are increased if anyone in any way seeks to do enough for
them. When this teaching is impressed on the heart, it humbles man. For
it not only takes away all help, but also holds before him the
inevitable judgment of eternal death. Just as the servant in the Gospel
\[Matth. 18, 23. ff.\], who is called to give account when he hears the
sad verdict that he and all his possessions are to be sold, throws
himself at the Lord\'s feet and implores that the punishment be
lessened, so even the thought of the divine verdict cannot be borne
without tremendous terror of the heart. By nature, minds are terrified
of this roar, and would rather they were not there at all than
experience these terrors over and over again.

But why does God do this? Why does he scare poor nature in this way?
First of all, this is done so that we may recognize our miserable
situation and grasp the teaching of the Son of God about the forgiveness
of sins by grace all the more eagerly; then also to make the glory of
His mercy evident. For how can a good deed be recognized by one who has
not experienced adversity? Therefore, God\'s immeasurable goodness
shines forth in that He shows mercy to the wretched sinners, who are
condemned to eternal death, in regard to their sins.

[1622 L. XXV, 278-280. - Interpretations on the Prophets. W. Vl.
2388-2391. 1623]{.underline}

The roar is a salutary roar, even though it is terrible and full of
terror. Therefore, it is a salutary roar, although it is terrible and
full of terror.

But after the roar from Zion, he also lets his voice be heard from
Jerusalem, that is, he speaks kindly, he no longer frightens but
comforts hearts, holds up to them the exceedingly kind heart of his
Father, tells us to look to his cross, exhorts us to hope for the
forgiveness of sins by trusting in his death, and for eternal
righteousness and life by trusting in his resurrection. He commands that
we be baptized into his death, he commands that we eat his body which
was given for us, and drink his blood which was shed for our sins. By
this oil the astringency of the wine is softened, and hearts are turned
from fear and terror to rest and gladness. For how should they fear God,
of whom they see that He Himself has not disappeared His Son? How should
they further doubt their blessedness, since they see the Son at the
right hand of the Father, who has acquired the human race as an
inheritance with his blood?

Therefore, at this voice that resounds from Zion, heaven and earth are
moved. Heaven is opened and no longer remains closed. The Father Himself
praises the Son from heaven, and not only angels descend to speak kindly
to men, but also the Spirit of God Himself to dwell in our bodies. These
things were unheard of before this voice sounded from Jerusalem. The
earth also takes on a new appearance. Those who were safe begin to fear
God, not only discarding the pretensions of the flesh, but also throwing
away the worship services they had used until then, because they see
that God does not want to be worshipped according to our will, but
according to the precepts of His Word. This they embrace with reverence,
and through faith in the Word they receive forgiveness of sins and the
Holy Spirit, through whom they call upon God in all dangers and confess
His name, and are not afraid of the threats and rages of the

World. Is it not an excellent movement that suddenly at this voice (as
the prophet says) everything becomes new?

But Mau does not have to pass over the glorious testimony of Christ in
order to refute the persistent error of the Jews. They hear the prophecy
of the prophet that the Lord will speak from Zion. But they may answer
when this will happen. For since they cannot deny that Jerusalem and
Zion have long since been destroyed, are they not compelled to confess
that this prophecy was fulfilled while Jerusalem still stood? But by
whom or how is it fulfilled? Was God\'s voice so weak, at which, as the
prophet says, heaven and earth shook, that they could not hear it? But
if they heard it, were they so wrong that they did not want to hear it
and despised it? Does not the thing itself speak for it, since it is
certain that the prophet speaks of the Messiah, or of Christ\'s kingdom,
that the Messiah has long since come, while Zion and Jerusalem 1) were
still standing?

But the blind Jews do not know which way to turn, since they are going
astray as in a thick darkness. But we who believe that Christ has
appeared and recognize that he is not only a man, but the Son of the
eternal God, we, I say, know that through Christ Jesus, who was born of
the Virgin Mary, this prophecy has been fulfilled and that he is the
true Jehovah, as several passages of the New Testament testify. Joh.
14, 1. He says: \"If you believe in GOD, you also believe in me.\"
Likewise \[v. 10. f.\]: \"The words that I speak to you, I speak not of
myself. But the Father that dwelleth in me, the same doeth the works.
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me.\" Likewise
\[v. 9.\], \"Philip, he that seeth me seeth the Father.\" But as one
must not try to escape these sayings by the false interpretation, as if
Christ spoke only of the office commanded him by the Father, so also the
present passage must be understood simply in this way, that Jehovah,.

1\) Erlanger: IsrosoI\^lLLi-SS instead:

1624 L. **XXV. 280-282.** interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 21. 22.
**W. VI, 2MI-23S.\].** 1625

God Himself speaks when Christ speaks, and that those hear the true,
eternal God Himself who hear this voice resounding in Zion. For God is
not to be sought apart from Christ, and although there are differences
of persons, there is only One eternal God, as Paul says \[Col. 2, 9\],
that in Christ dwells the fullness of the Godhead. This description of
the person could not be omitted at this point.

Therefore you have these two pieces of the new testament, namely, that a
new teaching will go out from Zion, and that the teacher who will first
spread it is God. Here a third thing is included; because Joel also
mentions a physical place, and prophesies of a voice that is heard with
ears, it is certain that this teacher is also a man. From this all the
historical events of the New Testament follow that he had to die because
he was a man. But because he is not merely a man, but the eternal Son of
God, he could not remain in death, but had to rise again, and, after sin
had been atoned for by his death, and death overcome and done with by
his resurrection, possess the eternal kingdom. All this follows by a
very certain inference. But what will be the purpose of this voice from
Zion and what kind of event will follow it? This is indicated by the
following.

**V. 21, 22: But the LORD will be a refuge for his people, and a
stronghold for the children of Israel. And ye shall know that I the LORD
your God dwell in Zion in my holy mountain. Then Jerusalem will be holy,
and no stranger will pass through her.**

That is, all who accept that voice with a humble heart and submit to the
Lord who judges them will find the Lord Himself a refuge or confidence,
and a stronghold in which those who take refuge in Him are secure
against the violence and attacks of all enemies. With these few words
the prophet does both, that he shows what the gospel teaches in summa,
and what the right service fei. The law, as we have often said, has to
do primarily with these two things: it shows what the gospel teaches in
summa, and what the right worship is.

God demands of us, and he who does not do the will of God is threatened
with punishment. For even though promises are added to it, we think of
the promises in vain at this point, because our nature is so corrupted
by sin that it cannot do the will of God, but we certainly hold with
Paul \[2 Cor. 3:6\] that the law is an office of death, since it demands
what we cannot do and adds the sentence of death.

But the gospel is a teaching that does not, like the law, demand what we
should do, nor does it threaten the penalty of death, but also gives
sinners the certain hope of life if they only believe in Christ. For it
holds up to us the Son of God, who became man for our sake and was given
up as a sacrifice on the cross for our sins. When hearts seriously
consider this sacrifice for their sins, they hope for forgiveness of
sins and take refuge in God, whom they feared as an enemy before the
voice of the gospel sounded.

But it must be noted that both words, hope and refuge or stronghold,
give a clear indication of the dangers in which we all find ourselves by
nature. For why should hope be promised if the greatness of the dangers
did not bring despair? And how could the promise of a refuge or a safe
place have any place if we were without danger and in safety? How blind,
therefore, are the teachers of the pope, who discourse on the uninjured
powers of nature and the faculty of free will by which we can prepare
ourselves for grace! Why do they not look at the likeness that Christ
presented to us \[Luc. 10, 30. ff.) of the man who was robbed and
wounded by the robbers? For the devil, through sin, has robbed us of the
most glorious gifts, the knowledge of God, righteousness and right will,
and has cast us into eternal death, whereas if it were not for sin we
would have lived forever. For what have we in us for hope or

1626 L. XXV, 282-284. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 2E-2SS7.
1627

What is the remedy for these ills? Can man, once he has died, give
himself life anew? Since we are all in this danger at all times, we
truly live in a dangerous place where nothing is certain.

And, of course, people who are not completely nefarious and safe see and
feel these dangers. Therefore, a Jew runs to his Moses and thinks that
the services and works commanded by Moses are, as it were, a harbor in
which he can rest safely. The papists have their masses, their
intercessions of the saints, fasts, vows and similar practices by which
they draw confidence that they will be safe against the devil and in
God\'s judgment. But all of these are protective defences, which are
like fig leaves. But the Gospel alone teaches where there is a certain
hope and a certain place of refuge against death, sin and the devil,
namely in God alone. This is the only harbor to which we safely turn
when either our conscience or death or the devil oppresses us.

But how does this happen? Does not God hate sin? Doesn\'t He threaten
sin with certain punishments? Is it not He alone for whose sake we fear
because of sin? How, therefore, can we flee to Him from whom the certain
punishment of sin is to be expected? I answer: This is in truth the
secret of the kingdom of God, which is unknown to the whole world, but
known only to the godly. All that we have just said about God is true,
that He hates sin and punishes sin with eternal death; but the Son of
God became our mediator, who took the punishment upon Himself, suffered
death to atone for our sins, and in this way reconciled us to God the
Father, who, after sin is taken away, not only has no cause to hate us,
but rather even loves us for the sake of His Son.

And this is the most noble service of the New Testament, that one should
put his hope in God through Christ and take refuge in God in all
dangers. But this service is hindered in many ways. When dangers of war
threaten, as

We are frightened by the power of the enemy, we have no confidence in
our cause because we seem to be less well equipped. Thus, when we are
oppressed by famine, we certainly think that our help is in great
supply. But this happens even more in perils of conscience; there
certain sins almost bring us to despair, and we think that we could more
easily hope for mercy if we did not have it. But these carnal thoughts
must be resisted, and we must place our hope in the Lord alone, not in
our merits. Also, when our sins frighten us, we must take refuge in GOD
alone. He is pleased with this service and demands it in the holy ten
commandments, where he calls himself our God. But we, through the help
of the Holy Spirit, if we resist the flesh, can perform this service by
calling upon His name.

But, you will say, what will happen to the others who do not accept the
gospel? The prophet will show this later, for they are annoyed by the
gospel and stir up strife. Here, therefore, the church is involved in
new dangers, for the enemies of the word must be resisted to the death,
lest the pure doctrine and the right worship be suppressed, which is
their sole aim. But even in this danger the Lord keeps his name, for he
is a savior to those who hope in him and take refuge in his help, as he
will more abundantly lay out in the end. And here is the clear
consolation: \"You shall know that I, the LORD your GOD, dwell in Zion
on my holy mountain.\" That is, I will not leave the church that
recognizes me, and in which my voice resounds; I will be with her even
in adversity, and will pluck her out, as the 91st Psalm, v. 15. says. If
we could take this firmly into our hearts in time of trouble, how
blessed we would be! How we would not be troubled by any sense of
misfortune! But this must be considered often, and we must also ask God
to impress these promises on us like a seal through His Spirit and to
guide us through them in all dangers.

**1628 \". LXV, 284-286.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, 22. **W.
VI. 2S97-24V.\" 1629**

**Then Jerusalem will be holy, and no stranger will walk through it.**

Not without cause Christ commands that one should search for Him in the
Scriptures, for we see that in exceedingly short sermons the most
important things are comprehended. So far, Joel has painted the person
of Christ as being both man and God. Likewise, he has given a glorious
description of the Gospel, that it is such a doctrine that teaches trust
in God. But the present passage comprehends the article of our holy
Christian faith: \"I believe a holy Christian church, the congregation
of the saints.\" He says that Jerusalem will be holy, and strangers will
no longer walk through her. This article, as well as that of the Gospel
or the forgiveness of sins, the papal teachers have entirely obscured.
For how should they teach a holy church, since they call man to doubt
whether he is in grace or not? Therefore, they interpret it as a
blasphemy if someone says that he is holy. But we must take more credit
for the prophet who says of Jerusalem, that is, of the church that is on
earth, that it is holy. And indeed, the article of our faith is not to
be doubted, which calls the church a holy one, which believes the
resurrection of the flesh and is still in the flesh.

But in order that this article may be the more clearly understood, the
reader must be reminded that Scripture speaks of the church in two ways.
For first, it calls the church in general all who profess the same
doctrine and use the same sacraments, even though there are many
hypocrites and ungodly mixed in with it, as Christ says \[Matth. 20,
16\]: \"Many are called, but few are chosen.\" Likewise Marc. 16, 16.\],
\"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that
believeth not shall be damned.\" For the last part of this saying
indicates that some are baptized who nevertheless do not believe, and
therefore are condemned, as also the parable of the wedding teaches
\[Matt. 22:11 ff\]. For those who are at the wedding are all called, but
not all of them have the wedding

Clothes on, and these are thrown out. In the same way, the parable of
the fish net \[Matth. 13, 47 ff.\], as well as of the seed and the tares
\[Matth. 13, 24 ff.\], depicts the church as one in which there are evil
and good; and the evil are predominant in number, as the saying \[Matth.
22, 14 ff.\] testifies: \"Many are called, but few are chosen.

But there are always some elect in this common crowd, that is, those who
accept the word in right faith and receive the Holy Spirit, for the
ministry of preaching cannot depart without fruit. This righteous part
is also called the church in Scripture, and to it the name \"holy\"
actually belongs, not because the elect are without sin, for the flesh
retains its nature and is never without sinful impulses. 1) Although 2)
the godly, by the help of the Holy Spirit, keep these impulses down and
do not let them shoot the reins, these impulses are nevertheless a
damnable sin in themselves, but they do not condemn the godly, because
they recognize this impurity of their hearts and believe in Christ. It
is this faith that makes the church a holy one, for it seizes him who is
holy, and by his grace takes away our iniquity and consumes it, not
unlike fire consumes stubble. Now if you could see the elect church with
your eyes (as you certainly see it, but cannot believe that it is the
church), you would see people who are like the others, that is, weak and
sinful people. For it is only the elect who recognize their weakness and
ask daily for forgiveness of their sins. This is why Scripture calls
them everywhere poor and wretched, not only because of the common
misfortune they endure, but because they lament their weakness with
anxious hearts and are constantly tormented by fear of God\'s judgment,
while all the rest of the multitude safely indulge in their lusts. As an
example can serve the holy crowd of the apostles, who for so long heard
the Son of God Himself, and yet were

1\) Wittenberger: moridns instead of: rnotikus.

2\) Erlanger: Lst instead of: Dtsi.

1630 L. XXV, 286-288. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 24W-2463.
1634

they were not perfect in every respect, even after they had received the
Holy Spirit. For there are not only examples of their weakness, but also
of error, and indeed of a very great one, that some claimed that the law
was necessary for believers \[for salvation\]. And shall we then believe
that the complaints of Paul Rom. 7, 23. s. were unfounded: \"I see
another law in my members, which is contrary to the law in my mind, and
takes me captive to the law of sin, which is in my members. I wretched
man, who will deliver me from the body of this death\"?

Our adversaries see this constant weakness in others and feel it in
themselves as well. Therefore they deal harshly with us, as if we filled
hearts with vain hope, saying that we are holy in this life, as if in
truth only the one who has no sin is holy. For the saying of John \[1
John 1:8, 10\] is true: \"If we say we have no sin, we make God a liar,
and His word is not in us.\" Likewise Paul\'s saying \[Gal. 3, 22.\],
\"GOD has decreed all things under sin.\" For though, as we have said,
the flesh is kept in bounds by the saints, yet it does not cease to be
flesh, but retains its nature and is full of sinful impulses. The
saints, therefore, are in truth those who have sin, but it is forgiven
or not imputed to them because of faith in the Son of GOD. For Christ
has his kingdom among us in this life. But it is his kingdom to judge
with righteousness and to punish with judgment, Is. 11, 4. that is, to
preach repentance and forgiveness of sins in his name \[Luc. 24, 47.\].
Those who believe this preaching receive the Holy Spirit and forgiveness
of sins. In this way, the 32nd Psalm \[v. 1\] calls blessed those who
have their sins forgiven, that is, who have sin, but which is
transferred from them to the Son of God and not imputed. If you consider
this imputation, can you deny that you are holy? Did not Christ take
your sins upon Himself? Did he not suffer for you?

Is then your baptism nothing, and must you be utterly cast out of the
church? If then thou thinkest that this is too hard, and hast some
confidence because of the passion of Christ and thy baptism, let it not
be a small and slight confidence, but a full one, that thou mayest
certainly hold to it, you are God\'s child and holy, not for your own
sake, of course, as if you were without all sin, but for the sake of the
Son of God, who has taken away your sin and adorned you with His
righteousness, as Isaiah adorned Him in the passage cited earlier \[Cap.
11, 5\], that righteousness is the girdle of his loins, and faith the
girdle of his kidneys, that is, his body, the church, is clothed and
adorned with his righteousness, and that with a certain and eternal, not
with a hypocritical.

This error of the papists is a harmful one, and therefore it deserves to
be punished often. But it is so deeply ingrained in the hearts of all
men that we are horrified when the name \"holy\" is attached to us, and
no one thinks that he is worthy of this name. For we think that this
belongs to those who, having got rid of the flesh, either live in the
heavenly community or await the resurrection in the graves. But we are
to learn that we do not have this glory from ourselves, nor from our
works, powers, or merits. For if we look at ourselves, we are in truth,
as Paul calls himself \[Rom. 7:23. f.\], wretched men and prisoners of
sin. But when we look to the Son of GOD, when we contemplate the holy
baptism and the Spirit of GOD dwelling in this wretched and weak temple
of our flesh. Dear one, will we not then attach the name \"holy\" to the
Son of GOD and the Holy Spirit? Therefore, we are to firmly hold that
\"Jerusalem,\" as the prophet calls it, is in truth holy, for the sake
of the HEART who dwells in Zion. For if we believe in the Son of God, if
we have confidence that we are redeemed by His blood, if we are washed
away by Holy Baptism, we are truly holy, like the Blessed Virgin, the
mothers of God, like Peter, Paul and others. For

1632 L. xrv. **288-290.** leauna of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 22. W. **VI. 2403
-240\".** 1633

Although these, that I say so, have an advantage over us because of
their own holiness, that is, because of certain gifts, it is certain
that they are not holy because of these gifts, but only because of faith
in the Son of God. But we also hold fast to this, for we recognize that
the same Christ became the sacrifice for us, and that we, who were
baptized with the same baptism, have received the same Holy Spirit.
Therefore, although there is some inequality among us, Christ remains
the same everywhere, and wherever he comes, he brings with him the same
gifts, forgiveness of sins and the Holy Spirit. The papists do not know
this, therefore, to the shame of Christ, they leave this name \"holy\"
only to those who have put off the flesh.

But why does he add, \"And no stranger shall walk through them any
more\"? Strangers are added to the church, and in great numbers,
according to the saying, \"Many are called, but few are chosen.\" Here
is the lesson of the ban, which, like the church, is twofold: one is
worldly, or outward and visible, which the church uses against those who
live shamefully, according to Christ\'s commandment Matt. 18:17 ff. This
rule must be kept in the church by all means. For the ban is not a
trivial thing, since it excludes from the kingdom of Christ and retains
the sins without hope of forgiveness unless repentance is made.
Therefore, it was not enough for Christ that the sinner be admonished
once and again by private persons, but he also wanted him to be
admonished by those who administer the public ministry before this
severe sentence of banishment was pronounced.

Nowadays, many accuse the ecclesiastics as if the ban had fallen through
their negligence. Many accuse the authorities as if they oppose and
forbid the use of the ban, but Christ\'s saying clearly testifies that
the sinner is to be admonished privately before those who are in the
public preaching office are to pass this judgment, and yet even then the
judgment is not to be passed if an earnest and godly admonition of the
church minister has not preceded it.

has gone. If the sinner despises these and continues in his sin, only
then should he be put under ban.

What prevents the ban today? Nothing other than that in this play no one
does his Christian duty. You have a neighbor; you know his life and
customs, your pastor either does not know them at all or does not know
them so well, for how could he know each one? Now, if you see your
neighbor enriching himself by unjust gain, if you see him committing
fornication or adultery, or governing his servants quite carelessly, you
first remind him, and godly admonish him, that he may have regard for
his blessedness and avoid the trouble. And, O what a holy work thou
wouldst have done, if thou wouldst have so honored him. But, dear, who
does that? First of all, truth is a hateful thing. You would rather keep
company and friendship with your neighbor, especially if he is powerful,
than make him your enemy. If now the second, third, fourth neighbor acts
in the same way, then with the first admonition also the second and
third falls away, by which your neighbor could have been brought back on
the right way, if you did your duty with admonition. Then it is the case
that we are almost all in the same vices. Therefore we fear that if we
try to pull the splinter out of our neighbor\'s eyes, we will be
reproached with the beam that protrudes from our eyes. This is the right
and foremost reason that the ban has fallen almost everywhere, because
the number of the godly is small everywhere. For if godliness were, as
it should be, dear to everyone\'s heart, we would esteem Christ\'s
command more highly than all the advantages of this life. For this
commandment of admonishing the brother is as necessary as that, Thou
shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal; for if thou neglect this
admonition, either for fear or for any other cause, it is not his body,
nor his goods, that are in danger, but the salvation of his soul. Now,
if a priest knows that any sin is repentant, he is bound to do this:
that he may not admit such people to the Lord\'s Supper unless they
repent, that is to say, if they do not repent, he may not admit them to
the Lord\'s Supper.

1634 xxv, 2SU-292. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2400-2409.
1635

means to refrain from sinning, and to indicate by a right confession
that they condemn and hate sins, but must be preceded by a godly and
serious admonition. But if the authorities do not do their duty in this
matter, and do not punish public offenses with serious punishment, they
sin exceedingly grievously. If it now even adds that it hinders
ecclesiastical punishment and encourages offenses, then it degenerates
from a servant of God to a slave of Satan.

Furthermore, beware that you do not despise this ban, which is
rightfully executed by the church, for it brings the certain judgment of
God\'s wrath and eternal damnation, as Christ says \[Matt. 18:18\]:
\"Truly I say to you: Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound
in heaven.\" But all the more the tyranny of the pope is to be cursed,
who used the ban also because of owed money, which had not been paid on
a certain day, yes. even because of disregard of his statutes, if
someone had not fasted, had not confessed 2c. Nowadays, however, he uses
the ban against us who confess the pure doctrine. First of all, Christ
comforts us and says: \"Blessed are you when men revile you for my sake.
Likewise \[John 16:2\], \"They shall put you under ban.\" Secondly, it
is certain that this ban of the pope is not Christ\'s ban, since it is
not done according to Christ\'s prescription. Therefore, it is not valid
in heaven, but it brings certain destruction to the one who abuses this
command of the Church, because it is a sin connected with blasphemy of
the name of God.

But just as this outward and visible ban of the church applies to those
who live shamefully in public and have been convicted of offense, so
there is also another, secret and invisible ban, which does not stand
with men, but with God Himself. For God does not judge, as we men do,
only according to works, but He looks at the heart and judges the
hypocrites, whom the Church cannot judge, as the well-known word says:
The Church does not judge what is hidden. However, not all of them stain
themselves with public

aversions. For although many people are miserly, fornicators and
adulterers, they do their sins secretly and sin, as it were, very
carefully and cannot be convicted by anyone. Therefore they are in the
church, they listen to sermons, they use the sacraments, and yet they
are actually banished by God, since they live in sins against conscience
and do not leave them, as Paul says \[1 Cor. 6, 9. 10.\]: \"Neither
fornicators nor adulterers will inherit the kingdom of God.\" But the
judgment of God will not remain forever far from them; men can deceive
them, but they cannot deceive God; on the last day He will gather all
wickedness through the angels and cast it into the eternal fire \[Matth,
13, 41. f.\].

Whoever wants to be freed from this secret spell of God should beware of
sins and repent, that is, improve his life, then pray and believe in
forgiveness for the sake of Christ. This is the only way to escape
God\'s secret spell. If you continue in sin and want to enjoy it as a
privilege, so to speak, that because you sin more carefully than others
you escape the judgment of the church, you will do nothing but deceive
yourself and bring upon yourself an even harsher judgment. Now although,
as far as the end is concerned, the outward ban is equal to the secret
ban (for the Lord has confirmed it in heaven), yet the outward ban
should be more desirable to us for this reason, because it is, as it
were, a medicine by which we are brought to repentance. But the secret
ban increases security, because it is not felt for a while.

Therefore, through the gospel, one church is founded, which is truly
holy, and there are none. There will be a highway and a way there, which
will be called the holy way, so that no unclean person will walk on it.
What kind of way is this? you will say. 1) Certainly the one of which
the Son of God preaches \[O. 14, 6.\]: \"I am the way and the truth and
the life.\" Likewise \[Joh. 8, 51.\]: He who believes in me,

1\) Erlanger: inyuis instead of: inquiss.

1636 **D. XXV, M2-2A4.** Interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 22. 23. W.
**VI, 2409-2413.** 1637

he will not see death. The ungodly also use the sacraments and thus
cover their ungodly nature through hypocrisy. For not all who are
baptized remain in the faith, and yet are baptized in truth, just as
among the Jews the greatest part were circumcised in the flesh, and yet
did not believe. But faith in Christ cannot be feigned. Christ is
therefore the way through which the ungodly do not enter, and which
alone sanctifies the church.

V. 23: In **that day shall the mountains run with sweet wine, and the
hills with milk; and all the rivers of Judah shall run with water: and
there shall go forth a fountain from the house of the LORD, and it shall
water the river Sittim.**

These are figurative speeches, for the fertile and wine-bearing
mountains are said to drip sweet wine, and the hills, where there are
happy pastures, are said to flow with milk, because the cattle are well
fattened and give much milk. But both fit 1) the gospel, which is
rightly compared to must and milk. Wine refreshes the heart of man, says
the Scripture \[Ps. 104:15\], and must delights by its sweetness: so the
word nourishes faith and gives strong consolation in the cross. The law
does the opposite, for because it accuses and threatens death, it
frightens and discourages the heart. But the fear that the law arouses
does not only contend with faith, but drives out faith altogether. The
Gospel, however, takes away this fear, since it shows the Mediator and
Intercessor, the Son of God, and fills hearts with a certain confidence
in the mercy of God. This then comforts the hearts in the cross, makes
them fearless in dangers and gives them great courage, as the examples
of the apostles show.

But what he says about the streams flowing with water refers primarily
to the progress of the Gospel. For just as arid lands are barren, so
everything grows and blossoms where there is an abundance of water.
Therefore, he teaches that wherever the Gospel is

1\) Erlanger: ante instead of: autsru.

The richest fruits will follow when the gospel resounds. For the Holy
Spirit has been given to him, who adorns his own with various gifts. The
first is the right knowledge of God, that God loves us and wants to make
us blessed through His Son. From this comes faith, through which we have
confidence that God has had mercy on us, considers us His children, and
will preserve us forever against all attempts and advances of all
enemies. From faith comes the call that we take refuge in God in peril
and expect certain help from Him. 2) We are to have faith in God.

The call is followed by love, and love is followed by obedience and
fear. Of course, not such fear as those who fear punishment from the
angry judge, but reverence and the highest endeavor to show gratitude
and to beware of offenses. And here, as it were, the various services
rendered to one\'s neighbor in this life are poured out as a sea, the
earnest endeavor to carry out one\'s profession, in the profession
humility, that we do not think highly of ourselves because of certain
gifts; in humility benevolence and good will toward all. But what am I
trying in vain to put into words all the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which
are innumerable? But these are very special gifts: Confession of faith,
contempt of danger, patience, hope. Just as there is a constant
springtime in a never-ending book, neither trees nor flowers nor seeds
feel the sun\'s glow, so where the joyful voice of the Gospel resounds,
many kinds of fruits come forth in great numbers.

But you will say that these fruits are not before your eyes; rather, the
opposite is true. For never have there been more troubles in the world
than now, never also more dangers and exceedingly grievous calamities,
of which they say that they are a living testimony to our sins. I
answer: in this they say the truth. But for this reason what the prophet
prophesies in this passage is not untrue. For faith is only

2\) Instead of 8p6in in the editions should be read Wohl opern. After
that we have translated.

1638 L. XXV, 294-2S7. Expositions on the Prophets. W. VI, 2413-2416.
1639

The church is like a field in which only the fourth part bears fruit;
all the remaining parts are filled with weeds by the hostile man. But
just as the weeds grow up high and fast, but the chosen seed grows more
slowly, so here also the aversions immediately catch the eye, and take
over everything far and wide in such a way that only those who are
carefully entitled can see these fruits, which the prophets praise so.
Look at all the authorities in the world: most of them are corrupt,
follow their usual ways, indulge in pleasures, impose one oppressive tax
after another, do not care about the word, do not respect the servants
of the word and good discipline. And yet, to him who is more attentive,
here and there will appear a good prince who cares for religion, who
loves his own, who is a guardian of respectability and good discipline,
and who is temperate. Thus, he who in his mind wanders through every
single house of his neighborhood will everywhere encounter relaxed
discipline, corrupt customs, courtliness, avarice, indulgence, angry
behavior, and yet among these will be found one and another in which the
parents are lovers of religion, accustoming their own to godliness,
limiting expenditure, diligently assisting the poor, not avariciously
seeking gain in dealings 2c. Thus, although few, there are still some
good people, whereas if it were not for the Word, there would never be
any fruit.

On this opinion is usually also drawn what is added of the spring which
gushes out of the temple and flows up to the valley Sittim. But other
similar testimonies of the prophets show that here something special is
indicated. In the prophet Zechariah, in the thirteenth chapter \[v. 1\],
there is a prophecy about the spring that will be opened for the house
of David and the citizens of Jerusalem to wash away sin and uncleanness,
that is, about such a spring in which those who wash in it will wash
away sin and all uncleanness. So Isaiah says in the twelfth chapter, v.
3. \"Ye shall draw water with joy out of thy well of salvation.\" He
does not make any single

The same is true of Joel in this passage, who, although he speaks of one
spring, nevertheless says that it will flow out of the temple as far as
Sittim, so that the waters of one spring will flow into a distant land.
Therefore, as it is not doubtful that Zechariah and Isaiah speak of Holy
Baptism, - what hinders us to refer also Joel to Baptism, since he
expressly speaks of the spring in the house of the Lord? For this is not
called a spring where there is no water. But on this mountain there is
not bad water, but the water of the LORD, for it gushes forth from the
house of the LORD. As there is a manifold use of the simple or natural
water, it is drunk, it moistens and fertilizes dry places, it is also
eminently suitable for washing away filth: so holy baptism waters the
soul inflamed with thirst for grace. For it is a fountain of salvation;
they that drink of it, that is, who believe the promise added to it, may
nevermore, as Christ saith, \"He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved.\" And the hearts that are refreshed by this heavenly drink of the
house of the Lord are no longer barren and unfruitful-but, as the Psalm
says \[Ps. 1:3\], like a tree planted by the rivers of water, which
yields its fruit in its season, for it is not hindered nor hurt by the
heat of the sun. But the chief fruit is that of which Zechariah says
that sins and uncleanness are washed away by this water. This fruit is
followed by eternal life.

But, you will say, how can water do this? I answer: Water, or the
element itself, cannot do this. For though it washes away the filth of
the garments and of the body, yet it cannot reach the soul. But Joel
speaks expressly, not of water in general, but of the water that flows
out of the house of the Lord. This is divine water, not only because
baptism is instituted by Christ and cleansed by his holy flesh, but also
because the Word and the Holy Spirit are added to this water. He
cleanses the heart through faith and washes away all impurities, so that
the body is cleansed of all impurities.

[1640 **L. XXV, 297-299.** interpretation of Joel (2.), Cap. 3, 23-26.
**W. VI, 2416-2419.** 1641]{.underline}

it cannot condemn us. Therefore, these are the most important gifts of
the church, the word and the sacraments, both of which serve to make us
firmly believe that the Lord is our hope and our refuge. The prophet
calls this church \"Judah\" at this point. But Judah means a \"man\" who
recognizes, confesses and praises God because of the mercy he has shown
to the human race. For all others who do not admire and praise this
mercy blaspheme God.

Since the synagogue is also among the number of these blasphemers, since
it has killed Christ and the apostles and condemned the gospel as the
most pernicious plague, it does not deserve to be called Judah.
Therefore the prophet calls her \"Egypt\" or Mizraim and \"Edom\".
Mizraim 1) means tribulation, and I do not doubt that this name was
attached to the land because of the history that the descendants of
Jacob were so shamefully kept there by the kings. But Edom has its name
from blood. These names fit very well for the adversaries of the church.

**V. 24-26 But Egypt shall be desolate, and Edom a desolate wasteland,
for the iniquity of the children of Judah, that they shed innocent blood
in their land. But Judah shall be inhabited for ever, and Jerusalem for
ever. And I will not leave their blood unsmelling. And the LORD shall
dwell in Zion.**

Of Mizraim and Edom, as I have said, it is not doubtful that it
signifies the synagogue that hates the church and rages cruelly against
it. For in this way Isaiah also calls Cap. 34, 5. the synagogue of Edom,
when he says: \"For my sword is drunken in heaven; and, behold, it shall
come down upon Edom, and upon the exiled people for judgment.\" Likewise
\[v. 6.\], \"For the LORD holdeth a slaughter in Bozrah, and a great
strangling in the land of Edom.\" That is, the LORD has subjected the
synagogue to banishment, because of the cruelty which it ex-.

1\) Erlanger: etstatt : vt Udom.

The Church has been practicing against the teachers of the gospel;
therefore, it must perish.

But it is useful that we are often instructed and reminded about this
fate of the church, not only so that our hearts are strengthened against
the anger of the cross, but also so that we are awakened to repentance.
For when the flesh feels the cross, it cannot help but be concerned
about the wrath of God, especially when it is aware of evil. But when it
sees, as the prophet teaches here of the godly, that it is undeservedly
afflicted, it thinks that God does not respect it. From this arises
either unwillingness or despair, the most harmful poison of faith.
Therefore, if we were not strengthened by examples and reminded by the
sayings of Scripture what the outcome would be, our hearts could not see
any firm consolation. For reason, as it were, is sailing full sail
toward either despair or impatience. First, therefore, the present
passage reminds us that the church is subject to many dangers and has
the devil and the world for enemies. But she fights with them in such a
way that it seems as if she will be overcome, because if one follows the
judgment of reason, she is defeated. Stephen is stoned, the Baptist is
beheaded, others are killed by another way of death. This seems to be
harsh, and the matter has the appearance that this does not happen to
them undeservedly. For they are charged with the most serious crimes, as
sedition, adulteration of religion, blasphemy, which is harsher than
death itself.

But the Lord comforts the church at this point and says that innocent
blood will be shed. For the church is not guilty of these crimes, but is
commanded by God\'s voice to despise these unjust judgments of the
world, and to hold that it is undeservedly afflicted by the world. This
is indeed no small comfort; therefore Satan seeks to remove it from the
eyes and from the heart. For this is the first thing in such calamities,
that the hearts are frightened by their

2\) Wittenberger: nttveittu instead of..everttu.

1642 L. XXV. 2SS-MI. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 24K-S422.
1643

They will look at the impurity and judge that the punishment is
deserved. But the Lord says that they are innocently afflicted. For
though they are sinners, yet for Christ\'s sake their sins are forgiven
them, and their enemies by no means go about punishing them for their
sins. They are in awe of the doctrine, the confession, the faith; only
these they pursue with diabolical hatred and strive to eradicate.
Therefore, they are innocent in two respects, both because of faith in
Christ, which takes away sins, and because of the unjust judgment of the
enemies, who declare the supreme gifts of the Holy Spirit to be
blasphemies.

But it must not be denied that the church is often plagued by guilt.
Although David hears that his sins are forgiven, he still has to suffer
the punishment of murder and adultery, in that the child born in
adultery had to die, and he himself is deprived of the kingdom through
his son. And Peter says \[1 Ep. 4, 17.\] that the judgment begins at the
house of the Lord. But for the sake of such sins the hatred of the world
is not directed against the church, nor does it punish it for that
reason. Therefore, the godly are undeservedly and in truth innocently
afflicted. For the world hates confession and faith, which are certainly
not sins but the highest gifts of God. Therefore, the punishment is just
as far as God is concerned, for before Him no one is innocent. He hates
sin, however, and wants it to be taken away in us all the time, and in
this way calls us to repentance, but when the world torments the godly,
it does not have this purpose in mind. Therefore, as far as the judgment
of the world is concerned, which persecutes and afflicts the godly, the
church is completely innocent, and the prophet commands them to uphold
themselves in the cross with this comfort.

To this consolation is added another, which is taken from the end. For
although it seems unreasonable to reason that the godly should be
undeservedly afflicted by the world and the devil, yet when it looks at
the outcome, which is certain, and sees that this calamity will be
followed by eternity, it will be filled with hope.

By this hope, they will regard their harm as less, and by the
expectation of eternal goods, they will overcome and conquer the
temporal misfortune. As it is considered wonderful and almost
unbelievable that God loves the afflicted and the unfortunate, so
nothing is more unbelievable than the outcome of which the prophet
preaches here. \"Edom,\" he says, \"has shed innocent blood in her land.
But Edom shall become a desolate wasteland. But Judah shall be inhabited
for ever, and Jerusalem for ever.\" What is this but what Isaiah Cap.
26, 19. says, \"Thy dead shall live\"? But those who kill the church
will be cast into eternal death. And Christ says \[Matt. 10:32, 39.\],
\"He that confesseth me, and loseth his life for my sake, the same shall
find it.\" Here, therefore, everything is reversed. Those of whom the
world judges that they are burdened with misfortune, and sees that they
are oppressed by God with exceedingly heavy chastisement, God loves and
then offers Himself to them most like a father to his children, when one
thinks that He is most angry. For it is true what Solomon says
\[Proverbs 13:24\] that the father loves the son whom he chastises. On
the other hand, while the world is thought to be victorious because it
prospers and prospers well, it lies defeated and is defeated, but not in
the way that the godly are defeated. For the latter, after having
survived a short chastisement, are freed from all the misfortunes of
this life. But the wicked will be subjected to eternal wrath and hellish
fire because of the innocent blood they have shed, and will not escape
punishment even in this life, as the exceedingly sad example of the Jews
testifies. For they are tormented in many ways in this life and must go
into eternal torment.

This is proved not only by the testimonies of Scripture, but also by
clear examples of all times. The kingdom of Egypt, which was in its
highest bloom, has completely perished; the extremely unhappy children
of Israel, indeed, who were completely in ruin, will

1\) Erlanger: innoosnlunr instead of: innoysutvm.

[1644 L. xxv, ÄW-sW. Interpretation of Joel (2.), cap. 3, 24-26. W. vi,
2422-4425. 1645]{.underline}

liberated and preserved by God. While the godless synagogue tries to
suppress Christ and rages indiscriminately against the godly, it is
completely destroyed, but the church continues. While the Roman world
rulers are eager to suppress the church, they themselves are suppressed.
Therefore, the enemies of the church are rightly compared to a garden
without water and a tree whose leaves wither, Is. 1, 30. For a while
they blossom, but finally they fall. But the church, which is considered
like a dead trunk, is in truth like a palm tree; while it is pressed
down in many ways by misfortune, it rises up against the burden through
the word of the Holy Spirit, and the more it is pressed down, the more
it rises up against the burden.

What is the cause of this unexpected and unbelievable outcome? Certainly
this, that the Lord adds at this point: \"And I will not leave their
blood unsmelling\" (Mundans ego, sanguinem non mundabo - purifying, I
will not purify the blood). Those who know the Hebrew language know this
peculiar Hebrew way of speaking. For just as in such passages: with
rejecting I will reject, hearing I will hear, the repetition indicates a
very great effort and diligence. So the negation added to the repetition
indicates a certain and unchangeable judgment. If the text said:
Purifying I will purify (mundans mundabo), then the most perfect
purification from all filth and sins would be promised. But now, adding
the negation, he denies the cleansing altogether, and indicates that it
is an unpardonable sin to shed innocent blood. Therefore, just as the
church that believes in Christ has the certain hope of forgiveness of
sins, so the enemies of the church are in an indispensable sin and can
expect nothing but certain and eternal damnation unless true repentance
occurs, as Isaiah also says, Cap. 2, 9: \"You will not forgive them.\"

This is the consolation of the church, which, as it judges the world by
the word, so for the word\'s sake not only does it judge evil speech,
but it also judges the world by the word.

and is blasphemed, but also has to endure plagues, even death in more
than one way. Here, therefore, we are to look, and think not of the
present trouble, but of the certain and yet hidden outcome which must
follow on both sides, namely, that Zion will be inhabited, but Edom will
at last become desolate. At this time, the church is disrupted in many
ways, and the many dangers that arise from persecution have not yet
ceased. We, however, give many proofs of our fear and despair. But why
do we not pick ourselves up and hold before us not only the well-known
undoubted testimonies of Scripture, but also the well-known examples of
all times? For which of all the kings of the world has not suffered
punishment for having presumed to persecute the church? Who has ever
fought with happiness for idolatry? Have not those who at first ruled
their dominions in the most blissful way, soon, when they began to
plague the churches, had to suffer the most terrifying dangers and
unbelievable misfortunes? The adversaries of the Word show their hatred
for our churches in many ways, and now such attacks are being made that
seem to entail the downfall of true religion. This fills the godly, who
remember all the descendants, with very heavy sorrow.

But we should not be frightened by the power of the enemy, not by our
weakness and small numbers. We should look at the matter itself. We hold
fast the confession of the Son of God and have not stained our hands
with innocent blood, but our enemies have long since stained their hands
and hearts with blood. Therefore, what will be the end of it? Certainly
such an end of which the prophet preaches here: Egypt, which plagues the
children of Israel, and Edom, which sheds innocent blood, will become a
desolate wasteland. But Judah, that is, those who hold fast to the
confession of the gospel, shall be inhabited forever, and Jerusalem
forever. For the Lord dwells in Zion, that is, in the church. Although
he allows it to be afflicted, he will not overthrow it or let it be
completely destroyed.

[1646 L. XLV. 303-30S. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
24S5-242S. 1647]{.underline}

With this glorious and exceedingly sweet promise Joel closes his
sermons. Therefore, let us put our petitions and prayers together at
these wretched times: O eternal Father of our Lord and Savior JEsu
Christ, we perceive the affliction of thy Church in this life, and how
it is afflicted by the devil and the world in many ways: therefore we
beseech thee by this thine only begotten Son, that thou wouldst first of
all by thy

Holy Spirit strengthen our hearts so that we will not succumb to so many
dangers; then that you will not only prevent the enemies from taking
over, but also make known to the whole world by your faithful and
miraculous help that your Church is dear to you, that you govern,
protect and save her, who lives and reigns as an eternal God, God the
Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit, from eternity to eternity,
amen.

End of the interpretation about the prophet Joel.

The main lessons from Joel\'s sermons.

1\. of repentance, Joel 2:12 ff.

\"Thus says the LORD: Turn to me with all your heart, with fasting, with
weeping, with lamentation. Rend your hearts, and not your garments, and
turn unto the LORD your GOD: for he is gracious, merciful, patient, and
of great kindness, soon repenting of punishment.\" From this the
Sophists of Louvain and the wretched Conciliar of Trent should take
their description of penance, who reckon ear confession and satisfaction
to penance. Repentance must be followed by amendment of life, but how do
they prove that it is a satisfaction for sins and deserves forgiveness
of sins? They also claim that faith is not a confidence. But why is it
held against us that God is gracious, merciful 2c.? Is it not done so
that we should trust in His grace, mercy 2c.? But in this way those must
be struck with blindness and nonsense who want to be teachers of
religion and of the holy Scriptures, and yet deliberately deal with
nothing else but that they suppress the right doctrine.

2 The punishments of drunkenness are famine and hard times; likewise
foreign enemies, Cap. 1, 5. ff.

\"Wake up, you drunkards, and weep and wail, all you wine drinkers, for
the must, for it is taken from before your mouths. For a mighty people
is coming up to my land, and they are without number.\"

3\. repentance includes calling, and the unintelligent must be enticed
with public ceremonies, Cap. 1, 14.

\"Sanctify a fast, call the congregation together, gather the elders and
all the inhabitants of the land to the house of the Lord, your God, and
cry out to the Lord\" 2c. The papists also have ceremonies, but not for
calling, which they do not know at all, since they do not know the faith
and persecute the Word.

4\. right form of prayer, Cap. 2, 17.

\"O LORD, spare thy people, and let not thine inheritance be put to
shame, that the heathen should reign over them. Why will you let say
among the nations, Where is now their God?\" The prayers of those at
Louvain and Trent, who pray in the name of the dead, whose intercession
they seek and thereby exclude Christ, naturally agree with this form and
say that they act Christianly in it. They invent various kinds of prayer
(dulias, latrias, hyperdulias) and other strange things. Thus they
reveal how diligently and godly they read the writings of the prophets,
which, as the wretched Council of Trent commands in a new decree, are
not to be read other than in the usual 1) Latin translation. For thus
they provide for their idleness, and their disciples take pains to see
that they do not miss anything in what they should truly understand.

1\) Wittenberger: inusitata instead of: in usitats.

[1648 L. XXV, zss-308. the main teachings from the sermons of Joel. W.
VI, 2429-2433. 1649]{.underline}

since they reject languages, an exceedingly glorious gift of the Holy
Spirit. But as for calling, remember Christ\'s saying, John 16:23: \"If
you ask the Father anything in my name, he will give it to you.\"

5\. a promise of the fruits of repentance, Cap. 2, 18. ff.

If you turn to your God, the LORD will be jealous for his land and will
spare his people. And the LORD will answer and say unto his people,
Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil in abundance, and ye
shall have enough; and I will not suffer you to be put to shame among
the heathen any more\" 2c. But what can Germany promise herself, since
the bishops insist on idolatry, but the others, on our side, do nothing
from their usury, their splendor, their indulgence, their fornication,
their cheating 2c.?

6\. of the kingdom of Christ and the ministry of Christ, chap. 2, 23.

Christ is called \"a teacher of righteousness\", just as Paul \[2 Cor.
3, 7. 9.\] calls Moses a servant of sin in the fourth way, and it is
clearly stated that he is sent by God the Lord. Therefore, two persons
are taught here, that of the Father and that of the Son, one who sends,
the other who is sent.

7\. of the office and person of the Holy Spirit \[Cap. 3, 1\].

He who 2) before promised the Teacher of righteousness, Christ, now
promises his Spirit: \"I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh.
Therefore, the mystery of the Trinity is shown here in the clearest way.

1\) in Quarta \"eatsutia will probably have the same meaning as yuarto
moüo, Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1418, Thesis 2. Cf. the
addendum to this vol. XX, 2404. The sense would be: as Moses is called a
servant of sin to all, so Christ alone is called a teacher of
righteousness.

2\) Erlanger: Hui; Wittenberger and Jenaer: Huia. We have followed the
former reading.

8\. from the invocation that it brings eternal life \[Cap. 3, 5\].

\"And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved.\" Calling on the Lord means the word, the
sacraments and faith, Rom. 10, 13. ff. But you should certainly consider
that this saying is not understood by any papist.

9\. of the calling of the Gentiles \[Cap. 3, 5\].

\"There shall be salvation in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, even among
the remnant whom the LORD shall call.\"

10\. summa of the teaching of the gospel \[Cap. 3. 21. f.\].

\"The LORD shall be a refuge to his people, and a stronghold to the
children of Israel. And ye shall know that I the LORD your GOD dwell in
Zion in my holy mountain.\"

The article of the holy Christian faith that the church is holy \[Cap.
3, 22\].

\"Then Jerusalem will be holy, and no stranger will pass through it.
With this saying compare the statement of the wretched Council of Trent:
no one may be sure that he is in grace. That is, of course, to please
God without faith, which is impossible, as the Epistle to the Hebrews
\[Cap. 11, 6\] teaches.

12 A Testimony of Baptism, Cap. 3, 23.

\"At that time a spring will come forth from the house of the Lord. But
what kind of spring this is, Zechariah shows, Cap. 13, 1.

The church, which is afflicted in the world, will be saved at last, but
her decease will be a sign of the end of the world.

followers will perish (Cap. 3, 24-26.\].

\"Egypt (that\'s what he calls the unbelieving synagogue) shall become
desolate, and Edom a desolate wasteland, because they shed innocent
blood in their land. But Judah shall be inhabited forever, and Jerusalem
forever. And I will not leave their blood unsmelling. And the LORD shall
dwell in Zion.\" By this hope we are to be lifted up, for it is sure and
steadfast. Other sins will be forgiven, but the shedding of the blood of
a

1650 L. XXV, 7f. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. VI. 24ZS. 1651

Christians cannot remain unscented unless the princes, following the
example of Manasseh, mend their ways, as Christ says of the Jews \[John
8:24\], \"You will die in your sins.\" But now they surely despise this
terrifying verdict.

\[Revelation 22:20: \"Come, Lord Jesus!

Yes, I\'ll be there soon.\"

Only believe and persevere, little host \[Luc. 12:32\].

Ps. 89:16: \"Blessed is the people that rejoice.\"

3\. lectures on the prophet Joel, **according to the Zwickau manuscript.
\*)** Delivered in 1524; printed in 1884.

Translated from the Latin.

D. Martin Luther on Joel.

^1^ ) All the prophets have the same opinion, that they aim at the
future Christ. They use everything else so that we should draw
everything to the future judgment: if a pestilence comes, the judgment
will come; if God comes with benefits, the glory will come soon.

First, he describes a certain destruction in the land and urges all to
fix their eyes on the Christ who is to come. In the first chapter he
tells the present history that he sees; in the second chapter he begins
a prophecy. So we will have many troubles at first, and after that the
last judgment will come. In the first chapter, therefore, he is startled
and presents the plague before his eyes, which he

1\) The following is prefixed as a motto: He who feeds the flesh feeds
an enemy; he who kills the flesh kills a friend - The world is not
worthy to have the gifts of God; it is not worthy to honor 2c.

2\) Instead of trakimns in the original, tradainns will have to be read,
which the Weimar edition suggests and the Erlanger has set.

in the land, and prophesies that they may turn to God through this
plague; if they do not, he indicates that a greater destruction will
come. In sacred history, these things can be seen: faith and unbelief
against the word of God 2c. Where the word of God is, there is always an
example of unbelief in those who despise it, and of faith in the few who
believe it 2c.

At what time Joel prophesied, I have nothing certain. I believe that he
is older than the other minor prophets. He seems to have worked
(floruisse) at the time of the peace, since he calls all that they
should see. 3) This order does not seem to me to have been kept among
the Hebrews. He seems to have been before Isaiah and Hosea 2c.

3\) It will have to be added: \[v. 2.) if such plague ever had MtMmdM
before.

4\) The order of the small prHchets in the holy scripture. This is how
it is interpreted in the first relation of Joel (Col. 1419).

\*The manuscript Ro. 3 of the Zwickauer Rathsschuldibliothek contains
the lectures on Joel to Micha. It is a real colkgien booklet, written by
Stephan Roth with a hurried hand. Only for the second chapter of Joel
did he do the preparatory work of copying the text of the Vulgate in
lines far apart from each other, and then put the shorter word
explanations, which Luther would have given, on top of them in the
Collegium. He wrote the longer explanations on the second column of the
sheet. With the following lessons he gave up this procedure again. \"But
of course,\" says the Weimar edition, \"the dictation and the occasional
free outpouring of Luther is not recorded literally. The sentences are
often written only in half, one sto. following the other. How
abbreviated appears the conclusion of Jonah s\" But for this, the
suspicion falls away, as if he had added additions from his own head, as
he was guilty of this in other Luther writings, namely in Zechariah.
This manuscript was found by D. Buchwald and copied for the Erlangen
edition. There our writing is found opp., tom. XX V, p. 7; then with
many improvements in the Weimar edition, vol. XIII, p. 67. We translate
according to the latter edition.

1652 L.xxv. 8f. Interpretation of Joel (3.), Cap. 1, 2-8. 1653

**\[The first chapter.\]**

**V. 2. Hear this.**

He does not seem to have prophesied this in one place, but in many, as a
prophet must do.

**V. 3. Tell your children about it (super hoc).**

Instead of super hoc it should rather be \"of it\" (de eo), as if he
wanted to say: Do not forget this miracle. He only presents the present
evil, he only tells the history 2c. 1) By these four kinds of beasts,
all that is in the fields and vineyards has been consumed. An
invulnerable plague is described; although it is temporal, it has
brought about pestilence and famine.

**V. 4. What the caterpillars leave.**

Eruca is \"caterpillar\", \"cabbage caterpillar\". The others are
unknown to us. If one could be presumptuous, I would say that bruchus is
\"the large rough caterpillar\"; the Hebrew word is translated sometimes
by locusta, sometimes by bruchus. - Rubigo \[\"gore\"\] wants to denote
a morbid condition of the seeds, but it is not that; it is an animal
which is translated sometimes by bruchus, sometimes by locusta. It is
certain that there are four species of animals that consume everything
that is green in the fields and vineyards. The locusts (locustae) and
the beetles (bruchi) harm mainly the seeds. By these things he calls to
repentance:

**V. 5. Wake up, you drunkards.**

As if to say, \"The wine is gone.\" He does not mean to say that they
are drunk, but to punish their habit: You who are wont to fill
yourselves and are fond of wine, look to the work of GOD, what He
intends to do 2c. - \[In\] dulcedine, is not well translated. \[It
should read:\] You who like to drink the must when it is still young,
\"which is still sweet and tastes good\" 2c.

1\) Already here in the Altenburg manuscript the following keyword is
set correctly, which is missing in our VorLage.

**V. 6 For a mighty nation is coming up to my land.**

Ascendet is as much ascendit. He seems to me here to speak poetically
like Virgil in the fourth book of the Georgica \[v. 21 sqq.\] of the
bees, which he calls kings 2c. As if he wanted to say: These beasts have
done as much damage as if a king or a nation with a large cavalry or an
army had devastated the land 2c. The animals \"come along\" as it were
with an army; it is not less, as great damage they do, as if they were
lions 2c.

**V. 7. \[That same thing devastates my vineyard.)**

He speaks here in the person of each: \"Your vineyard is gone, mine
also.\" 2) \"The vineyard\" is the vine; made desolate (posuit in
desertum, Vulg.), that is, \"desolate\"; \"stripes\" means: destroyed.
The prophets use imagery, as do others. He repeats the same opinion,
\"Shew him,\" 2c., of fruits and green leaves. \[Virgil says: 3)\]
\"Winter has stripped the forests of their honor.\" - \"Cast it off,\"
that is, made it frail and a rejected one. - \"That its branches stand
there white,\" that is, without leaves. \[Instead of \"white\" would
be\] better: bare. 4)

**V. 8. hay, like a virgin.**

He uses a simile. It is an exceedingly violent love between bridegroom
and bride. She loves; no, she does not love, but she rages. As she loves
him to the utmost degree while she has him, so she laments in the
strongest possible way when she loses the bridegroom. \[\"Howl, like a
virgin\" is therefore:\] Under-.

2\) This first sentence is still drawn in the editions with -um
preceding.

3\) Oeoi-Mea, ub. II, v. 404.

4\) Erlanger: unclus instead of: nuäus. - Here the Erlanger makes the
remark: \"Gap in the manuscript.\" But there is no gap, but a short
line, because the paragraph has ended.

[1654 L. XXV, s-n. Interpretations on the prophets.. . 1655]{.underline}

of which you make the greatest lamentation that there is under heaven. -
\[Instead of super virum pubertatis suae in the Vulgate\] it is: about
the husband of her youth. 1)

V. 9. \[**For the grain offering and drink offering is away from the
house of the LORD\].**

\"The grain offering is gone,\" your glory, that is, the service
instituted by the Word of GOD. That will also suffer damage because the
priests will not have what to offer 2c. For the firstfruits were offered
to GOtte 2c. \"Food offering\" when, wheat, vegetables, and anything
that was solid. \"Drink offering\" was what was poured out as, oil and
wine. Therefore, this twofold offering of the priests will fall away.
All this he makes great, that he may bring them to repentance 2c.

V. 10. **The field is desolate.**

So the field is desolate. The land stands miserable, for the wheat or
grain is desolate. Languet oleum, \"the oil is dull\"; confusum mustum,
\"shamefully stands the wine\". Loud sublime images: \"It all stands
shamefully.\"

**V. 11. The peasants look miserable,**

\"that it may have mercy on me\". - \"That nothing may come of the
harvest in the field.\" You see that there will be no harvest.

1\) \"In the manuscript there are two sentences next to each other,
which the Erlangen edition has read line by line and therefore blended
into each other\" (Weim. Ausg.).- The whole passage reads according to
the Weim. Ausg:

sn-rö i. 6. \"ine ioliis. iVIklius: nuäae. - 8.

Iltitur siinilituüink: VkUknientissirnus avaor 68t Lponsi 6t 8PON8L6,
Llnat, HON arnat 86Ü iN8Lnit. IIt maxirne amat, (turn üabet, ita
rnaxirne planet, äuna amittit 8pon8Uin. Interäurn kae tidi rnLxiinnrn
planetum, \<\^un1i8 68t 8ulr eoelo. 8up6r virurn 6uv6ntuti8\' 8UN6 68t.
In contrast, the Erlanger:

iÜ68t: 8iN6 koliis:-utitursimilituäiQk, V6ii6lN6Ntl8, IN6liU8 UNÜL6. \")
8UUHNU8 Linor 68t 8PON81 6t 8PON8N6, int6räurn tsn tibi inLxiinurn piano
turn, aruat non . . . 86Ü in8anit, ut \<iuaii8 68t 8ub coklo. rnaxnn6
ainat . . . Iraket ita ruaxirn6 8vp6r virurn juv6ntuti8 8UL6 68t.
pian\^it ciurn arnittit 8PON8UIN. We refrain from any comment on this
achievement, but have considered it our duty to communicate it here in
full, because we bring proof on every page where the matter is to be
found in the Erlanger Allsgabe (as the most widespread next to Walch);
here, however, one would search in vain.

**\") I-svao\" in LlSvo.**

**V. 12: The vine also stands miserable.**

Instead of vinea confusa \[in the Vulgate\] it should read, \"The vine
stands miserable, the fig tree pitiful.\" \"The joy\" is that over which
they should have rejoiced. The prophet is not speaking of a human race,
but of the host of beasts that ravage the fields and vineyards 2c.

**V. 13 \[Gird yourselves\] and lament.**

Plangite, \"laments\". Cubate, \"lies.\" The same is repeated to produce
repentance,

**V. 14. Sanctify a fast.**

This is a Hebrew way of speaking.

**V. 15 \[O woe to the day!\] For the day of the LORD is at hand.**

A a a, \"alas\" \[in the Vulgate\] must mean \"woe, woe.\" 2) Here he
begins to touch on prophecy. \"The day\" is not the last day. - \"The
day of the LORD\" is what the Hebrews call any day on which GOD will
visit home 2c., as in Peter Ep. 2:12\]. \"He will look for you at home
with all calamity.\"

**V. 16. \[Then the food will be taken away from before our eyes\].**

Instead of vestris of the Vulgate\] it should be nostris \[\"ours\"\].
\"And from the house of our God joy and delight\", 3) because the
service falls away.

**V. 17. The seed is rotten under the ground (computruerunt).**

The interpreters diverge widely. \[It should read thus:\] \"The seed is
rotten in its soil, the granaries siud destroyed, the sheds decayed; for
the grain is spoiled,\" 2c., as if to say, \"Ye must not think that ye
shall gather much this year.\" \"The store\" which we keep for daily
use, is here called \"grain-.

2\) This first sentence is in the editions incorrectly still drawn with
to the preceding verse.

3\) We have inserted these scriptural words: \"And -joy\"; without them
the sentence is meaningless. - Furthermore, according to the Vulgate we
have put V68trj8 and nostris, instead of. V68tri and uostrj in the
editions.

1656 L-xxv.nf. Interpretation of Joel (3.), Cap. 1, 17-20. 2, 1. 1657

House\" (thesaurus- treasure) called. What is kept for sowing has also
perished, what was to be scattered as seed has perished. Secondly,
\[the\] \"store is also gone.\" Third, \"the sheers.\" \"You must not
worry that there will be much threshing.\" No threshing floor will be
built for threshing, nor will you store up seed 2c. Why? Because the
grain \"stands too shamefully.\" You have no hope of seed, nor of store,
nor of threshing 2c.

V. 18. **O how the cattle groan! 2c.**

Again, he puts before the eyes: All animals will die of hunger.

V. 19. **Lord, I call upon you.**

\"Oh have mercy, how miserable it is!\" By speciosa \[\"meadows\"\] are
to be understood dwellings, huts and tents;

the Hebrew word\] is not well translated \[by speciosa\]. \"The fire,\"
I think, is here taken figuratively, as if to say: these huts are
emptied as if by fire; all the trees have perished. Thus Christ \[Luc.
12, 49.\] uses \"fire\" for \"a calamity.\" \"Fire,\" that is, \"to do a
harm, to set on fire.\" Everything is devastated and ruined 2c.

V. 20. **For the rivers of water are dried up.**

\[Instead of suspexerunt in the Vulgate it should be:\] rugierunt, \"the
wild beasts cry out\"; in general like the deer \[Ps. 42:2\]. \"May you
have mercy, O Lord,\" that the wild beasts must perish. \"They have not
drink,\" all is full of drought. He describes in the simplest terms the
punishment inflicted on the land by these four kinds of beasts.

**The second chapter.**

The prophet has to do in the first chapter with the fact that he tells
the simple, small plague of the animals 2c., from which he makes the
conclusion later on the complete destruction, which was in front of the
whole people. He does not call anyone by name, but speaks in general;
from this it is clear that he is \"one of the old prophets\". God rules
the world in a very strange way, so that we think that it happens
according to human advice, as can be seen in the empire of the Turks,
which threatens all peoples. As if someone would prophesy: The Turk will
come 2c., so Israel had the Assyrian before other kings, who threatened
them the most. Of this the prophets prophesied, calling the people to
repentance, saying, Amend, amend. 2c. The prophets all have in mind the
future of Christ and Pa\'s end of the people 2c. All the texts in the
histories aim at this. The Holy Spirit sums up the whole thing at once;
thus the \"whole being\" of the whole kingdom of Israel can be summed up
in one glance.

The prophet acts in this second chapter alone in such a way that it is a
threat: \"Beware, beware! it will one day come to ruin.\" In the third
chapter we will have the kingdom of Christ and the judgment.

He describes the plague of all the people, which happened at the hands
of the Assyrians and Babylonians.

**V. 1. blow with the trumpet to Zion. 1)**

He exhorts that they should blow so that the people will be gathered.
\"Ring all the bells\", now is the pleasant time; the time will come
when everything will \"go to ruin\".

1\) \"Since the Zwickau manuscript shows in this chapter coherent larger
exegeses on one column, but on the other short notes written over the
text, both had to be merged into one continuous explanation. (Weim.
Ausg.) This is a thankful work, which the Weimar edition has done,
because what the Erlangen edition offers: first a longer text section,
then the glosses belonging to this text, and finally the longer
interpretations, presumes to the reader a laborious work, to which
probably only very few would understand themselves. We have followed the
Weimar edition.

1658 D- XXV, \^2-14. interpretations on the prophets. 1659

**Call on my holy mountain.**

Ululate, shout, call loudly, so that the people come together. See the
fourth book of Moses \[Cap. 10, 2. ff.\] about the different ways of
blowing the trumpets.

**Tremble, all the inhabitants of the land.**

Conturbentur, that is, to get into turmoil, \"to run together: What is
there here? What is there here?

**For the day of the Lord is coming.**

For it is a great thing. It does not always refer to the last day, but
to any day of visitation (as in Peter \[1 Ep 2:12\]), as often as the
Lord visits, either in mercy or in wrath, so that he may humble and cast
down.

**And is near. 1)**

Quia est prope \[in the Vulgate\] should of course mean: who (qui) is
near or [soon]{.underline} there. This is what all the prophets have
said. All the threats are that the times are at the last end, but by the
mercy of the Lord they are postponed.

**V. 2. a dark day.**

Another construction begins here. 2) Et turbinis \[\"a misty\"\], add:
\"day\". Quasi is \"like.\" Mane, that is, \"the dawn\". It is a
similitude: as it is not possible for the mountains to escape before the
dawn, so a people will come who will \"overrun\" so that one cannot
escape. What darkness and gloom is, you know. \[Scripture calls 3) peace
and light, which we call good\] 3) Days, \"when things are good\";
darkness, \"when things are bad\". Unhappiness is darkness; the day is

1\) In the Weimar edition, this is already marked with the number \"2.
But not only in our Bible, but also in the Vulgate it still belongs to
the first verse.

2\) In the Vulgate there is no punctuation mark at the end of the first
verse.

3\) The additions indicated here by square brackets are made by us
according to the Altenburg and Hall manuscripts; for even the text of
the Weimar edition is not satisfactory here.

4\> Instead of Konus we have assumed Konos according to the Hallischrn
handwriting.

Well-being. s \"A dark day, a gloomy day, a cloudy day, a misty day\"?
is misery and gloom. The prophet speaks poetically. 5) He speaks this to
describe the sad times, 6) not as the time of day, which makes merry s,
but as the time of night (Proverbs 31:18), which brings misfortune and
makes people sad 2c. He wants the power and the impetuosity of the
invading!!! People of the Assyrians and Babylonians. It will come
\"before you know it\" 7) 2c.

**The same was not the case earlier.**

He speaks of the final desolation and ruin of this people. The prophet
here comprehends the whole nature of the people and of the kingdom of
Christ, and sets it before us 2c. \"To the ground and failure it will
once go.\" Before GOD these things are sudden that are said 2c. Similis
ei \[Vulg.\] or ejus. \"Before\" (a principio): from the world or of
old. \"Not to be\" or: one has not.

**V. 3. Before him goes a devouring fire?**

Ante faciem, \"before him\". Ignis vorans, a ravenous or \"consuming
fire\". Exurens \[flamma\]: \"a burning flame.\" \"Like a pleasure
garden,\" like the paradise of Eden. As the people or fire devastates,
there will be \"a desolate wasteland,\" nor will there be anything left
to it that would have been torn out 2c. This is a description of
desolation. Fire is taken figuratively here, as above. As fire turns to
ashes, so this people will be turned to nothing. It indicates the utter
desolation of the people. He compares the desolation to the land as it
stands in bloom. Now the land stands like a paradise; afterwards the
exceedingly beautiful commonwealth will be a desert; everything is
prepared for the flame, the fire and the future desolation. This is what
happened to your Babylonian tower: it? \"had to be built\" before it was
destroyed. When empires once

5\) In our opinion, the Weimar edition has incorrect punctuation here:
ealamitas, denskrae, äies, torturm, miseria \"Wet-io: poetieus est
propketa.

6\) Instead of ckeserikit we have assumed cleseriimt.

7\) In our template: \"ehr sichs mnbgesihett\".

1660 L. XXV, 14-16. interpretation of Joel (3.), Cap. 2, 3-8. 1661

have fallen away \[, they do not come up again. Israel\] has not come
back to its former glory. So it went with Rome, Milan, Maguntia
\[they\], Corinth, Syracuse.

**V. 4. They are shaped like horses, and run like horsemen. 1)**

Quasi aspectus is as much as \"how\" (8i6ut). There is no one who can
escape, that is, by the violence of war everything will be devastated.
Instead of eorum, it should read ejus. Et quasi \[, that is\], and like
the horsemen they will run fast. This is a description of the people who
are coming: \[they\] \"shall speed along\"; so surely shall they go,
with so great an army, that they shall fear nothing. They will rejoice
that they can destroy the land; so much is lacking that they should
fear.

**V. 5. therefore they burst forth on the top of the mountains as the
chariots rake, and as a flame blazes in the straw, as a mighty people
prepared for battle. 2)**

Sonitus obervox. Super capita \[\"on top\"\], which cannot be resisted.
Exilient: \[\"they blast\"\] client, \"allure.\" This word is in the
Psalm \[Ps. 29, 6. Vulg:\] \[\"they lure\"\] like a calf of Lebanon.\"
\"Straw.\" \"So light is the land to him\" that - - Velut is as much as
sic. He speaks of the power and strength of the people. Fortis or
robustus.

**V. 6. the nations will be astonished before him (Cruciabuntur).**

\"Before him,\" that is, before the enemy and adversary. \"The nations
will be terrified,\" \"will stand in anguish,\" will tremble like a
woman in childbirth, will be frightened, will be cornered. Not only will
you perish, but the kingdom of the Assyrians is such that it will
\[put\] all nations in fear. 3) A woman in birth

1\) Vulgate: Huasi N8p66tu8 eqnornrn N8p66tu8 oornin; 6t yns \"i 6Huit
\"8 816 eurrent.

2\) Vulgate: 8ieut 8onitu8 quuclriZurum 8Uper eapita montinrn 6X8Ünint,
8ieut 8onitn8 üannnue i\^nis Usvoruntm 8tipnlnin, V6lut populns torti8
praepurutu8 aci proslium.

3\) Thus supplemented according to the Hall manuscript. - The next
addition is taken from the Altenburg manuscript.

Nöthen is to be understood in such a way that she does not know what to
expect, what will happen 2c. \[The word is taken from the pains of
birth, that she does not know where from or \"in\". The word is used
very often in the Psalms.

**\[All faces find as pale as the pots?**

Omnes vultus vel facies redigentur in ollam or congregabuntur olla, or I
do not know what it is. In Nahum \[Cap. 2, 11. according to the
Vulgate\] it says: 4) The people will become so sad that they walk black
with sadness, as those who mourn walk in black clothes. But I would
rather that the pot not be taken for blackness. \[It is like\] in Michal
\[Cap. 3, 3.\]: to be thrown into a pot. \[They\] \"are broken up\" as
meat which is thrown into a pot. They will be broken up into a pot and
boiled and will not escape 2c. \[The people \"will be thrown into a
heap\" as cut-up meat is thrown into a pot. The people \"fall over a
heap, not knowing what \[they\] shall do,\" as Isaiah says \[Cap. 3, 6?
\"Then one will seize his brother.\"

**V. 7. \[They will run like the ridges, and climb the walls like the
warriors?**

Fortes are \"giants\". 6) Quasi is \"like\". \"The warriors\", warlike
people, that is, exceedingly warlike. I will describe to you even
abundantly the power of this people. They will not be afraid of the
stones, they will climb the walls. \"Every man shall go straight before
them\", \"shall press straight\", there shall be no one to resist them.
\"And not fail\" (\[Et non declinabunt\] a semitis suis), \"shall not
fail, shall run straight.\"

**V. 8. Mine will make the other one err?**

Unusquisque, any one. They will go along, \"finely ordered in a point\".
In calle, \"in his order\" (strato). God will

4\) In the Weimar edition is so interpungirt: Vkl N686IO qui\<f 8it in
Nuknin. k\'ient Kornin68 6t6.

5\) In our original, probably erroneously: Lgaiu.

6\) The Weimar edition has still drawn this to v. 6.

1662 **A- XXV, 16-19.** interpretations on the prophets. 1663

give the enemies luck; even though the bullets hit them, 1) it will go
out in such a way that they will not be wounded. 2) And before the
bullet, or when the bullet comes, they will fall down and not be
wounded. These are descriptions of the enemy taking the city.

V. 9. \[**They will go up to the houses\].**

Conscendent, \"they will rise\". \"Through the windows\" and in the
windows, \"like a thief\" at night.

V. 10. \[**Borne by him the land trembles, and the heavens are
inhabited.**

\"Before him\" the earth and the heaven will tremble. This is spoken
according to the heart movement of those who are in terror, 3) to whom
everything seems sad; \"all that \[one\] looks at\" is death; on the
other hand, \[everything is\] \"joy\" when I am joyful. Tenebrati sunt,
\"they become gloomy.\" Retraxerunt etc., that is, \"they restrain their
appearance.\"

V. 11. **Bor his army.**

That is, before his power, namely before the Assyrians. That this is
said of the Assyrians, and not of the locusts, you will know afterward;
hitherto you have had no clear place. \"For his host is very great and
mighty\" (quia fortia), because he is angry with us. \"The day of the
LORD,\" not their day, as the Assyrians mean. Valde, exceedingly
\[terrifyingly\]. Up to here you have the threat: when everything falls,
nothing endures.

He does not speak of the last judgment; they are sublime words with
which he indicates the impetuosity of the enemies. Before exceeding
terror and despondency all is sad and no comfort in a creature. All this
will happen, not because the enemies are able so much, because no

1\) Instead of tsrunt in our template, we have assumed Leriunt.

2\) This sentence is inserted in the Weimar edition in the middle of the
interpretation of the seventh verse (after: \"they will climb 4\>the
walls\"). The Erlangen edition has added it to the sixth verse, but with
the remark \"v. 7.\" in the margin. But without doubt, as the Altenburg
manuscript has done, it must be inserted at this point, in the eighth
verse.

3\) Zwickau manuscript: putisntiuru; Hall manuscript: pnrisutium, but
will read Mventiuni with the Altenburg manuscript.

Hair falls from our head 2c. \[Luc. 21, 18.\], but it will be out of
God\'s anger that makes me have an evil conscience. It is not their
strength; they are not mighty through their power, but through our
weakness. The prophets take everything away from the people and put it
on God; \"that hurts\". I do not see the Turk, but the wrath of God, by
which he wants to lead the people to repentance. Thus he wages war on
all the Gentiles, not only on his saints.

**V. 12. Thus says \[the Lord\]: Turn to me with all your heart, with
fasting, with weeping, with wailing.**

Because it says, \"turn back, it will not be better,\" \[In toto corde
should mean:\] toto corde ober ex toto corde, \"with all your heart.\"
\"With fasting,\" in which the heart humbles itself before God. In
planctu, \"with lamentations\". \"Rend your hearts,\" this he adds \[v.
13. 1, to condemn hypocrisy. Scindite, \"rend the hearts,\" this he
requires above all things. \"And not your garments.\" Out of displeasure
over a matter, the Pharisees and scribes tore their garments. So far we
have heard the serious threat of God of future persecution and plague.
Now he gives advice and consoles, whether perhaps this plague could be
postponed; but it is not averted. This is what the divine majesty is
wont to do. We also have an example with Amos, as with Lot and Abraham,
that he would have gladly postponed the destruction of Sodom. So now,
through the intercession of holy people, 4) \[the punishment\] is
postponed, but not cancelled. Finally the measure of the misdeeds of the
Amorites was full \[Gen. 15, 16.\]. He prescribes a way how this
devastation could be countered, namely that Israel converted from the
heart and repented. That means: \"Turn to me\", not in a fictitious way,
but in truth. He touches the hypocrisy and the servile fear with which
we sometimes use to deceive God. See the 78th Psalm, v. 34: \"When he
strangled them, they sought him.\"\] So also Nineveh, since Jonah
preached. \[The repentance \"does not come from the heart\", indeed, it

4\) By interesssiy ganetornva here is not to be understood the
intercession of the saints, but of godly people. In the Hallic
manuscript: ?ii opponnnt so ste.

1664 L. XXV. IS-SI. Interpretation of Joel (3rd), cap. 2, 12-14. 1665

does not last. The tree is recognized by its fruits. Faith demands
fasting and weeping, but from the heart; then it is the sign of true
conversion. Fasting is not not eating at the time, but abstaining and
moderating in all pleasures and amusements\] and living a life of
sorrow, \[as\] God is earnestly \"reconciled.\" 1) Your fasting and
weeping is done in a fictitious manner, since you do not weep from the
heart 2c.

**V. 13. sAnd turn to the LORD your GOD.\]**

And in such a way convert yourselves, \"then you come rightly to GOD\".
This verse is the way to turn to God, to God the Lord. Benignus is
gracious, favorable, who averts punishment, \"gracious\", \"who wails\"
of our misery. \"Patient,\" long-suffering. \"And of great kindness,\"
he is rich in goodness, showing mercy, praestabilis, inclined to do
good, who lets himself be sorry (poenitens) for \[the punishment\], who
easily repents of the evil, namely, which he has intended, \"soon
desists from the misfortune he wants to do.\" Thus it is said in
Jeremiah \[Cap. 18, 8\]: \"So shall I also repent of the calamity\" 2c.
God repents of misfortune when He changes the judgment that He does not
want to impose the misfortune. He is easily willing to revoke the evil
that has been inflicted, as if to say: easily willing to repent
(poenitibilis), easily willing to forgive. It is a glorious promise:
through the temptations he drives to the promises, to the contemplation
of the divine mercy. This is the wrath of God, that he \[wrath\] does
not want to destroy sinners, but to make them blessed. This human wrath
does not do. Thus it is said in Proverbs \[Cap. 27, 4. Vulg.\], \"Anger
hath no mercy, neither hath wrath that proceedeth forth; and who can
suffer the impetuosity of a zealot?\" The wrath of God serves to kill
and put away evil. In the threats strike

1\) The text offered here by both the Erlangen and Weimar editions is:
nonynoä

tum non oornoänt \[sä yuoä ndstinoat st luAudreva vitani änont, sorio
äous vorsuhnet wird.\" Our additions are after the corresponding passage
in the Altenburg manuscript, which is found there, however, only in v.
16.

sthe prophets\] 2) with the harshest words; immediately the most
salutary and sweetest promises follow. By the wrath the godly are bowed
down, by the promise they are raised up. The wicked are quite hard
anvils. They grasp only the goodness of God, not the threat, \"do not
grasp it rightly\". He adds a consolation so that the godly do not
become too fainthearted and despair because of the threats. This is
understood only by the godly. The threat is for the sake of the wicked,
but they do not accept it; for the sake of the godly is the consolation,
who hardly grasp it for fear and terror. These promises serve to comfort
consciences 2c. A frightened conscience prefers to hear nothing. \"Oh if
it would listen to the evil\" 2c. God does not like to inflict evil.
Against all too great tribulation serves this consolation, that he
easily repents of evil 2c. An excellent word to raise sorrowful
consciences. \[He is \"heartily sorry\" that he has to inflict evil.

V. 14. **Who knows, he may repent again.**

He speaks in the manner of a frightened conscience that can hardly be
raised. Here it begins to breathe again after hope. Instead of
convertatur, it would be better to say: he wants to turn back
(vertatur). Ignoscat, \"he wants to repent\". Relinquat, \"to desist.\"
\"Who knows, he may change it,\" that he does not strike. He may not
pour out his wrath in such a way that he does not still have remnants of
mercy. Notice the Cananaean woman: we are to take something of mercy in
every way. \"And leave a blessing behind.\" He may \"hereafter\" give
one more blessing, lest there be wrath, but he will add some more
blessings. This is a general exhortation and a prize of divine mercy.
They hang between hope and despair. \"To offer grain offerings and drink
offerings,\" namely, that we may yet offer grain offerings and drink
offerings to GOtte. Mvoda s \"grain offering\"\] is the sacrifice of
solid things, \"drink offering\" of liquid ones. The words

2\) Supplemented by us according to the Altenburg manuscript.

1606 L. XXV, 21-24. Interpretations On the Prophets. 1667

are spoken in the person of GOD: \"Your GOD.\" He speaks according to
the customs of this people; we have in spiritual manner (mystice) the
sacrifice of praise.

**V. 15. Blow with the trumpet to Zion, sanctify a fast.**

\"Sets a fast\" 2c., by which is indicated: Fasting is sacred to God; it
is a fasting, but one that is right (perfecta) and done from the heart.

**V. 16. Gather the people.**

\"Stand as if \[it were\] serious.\" \"The infants,\" 1) as if to say,
\"all toward.\"

**V. 17. Let the priests, the Lord\'s servants, weep between the hall
and the altar.**

Inter vestibulum, elsewhere porticum, \"the hall, porch of the temple\",
plorabunt: \"let them weep\", a word of exhortation. Ministri who serve
the Lord. Dicent: \"let them say\". I will indicate not only the manner,
but also the words, (Parce vor populo tuo \[in the Vulgate\] he
\[Luther\] deletes, for it is superfluous). \"To shame,\" elsewhere in
the Psalm \[Ps. 69, 12\]: to fairy tale (in fabulam \[Job 30, 9.\]).
Nationes, \"the heathen.\" Quare dicunt should mean dicent \[why should
they say?\]. God smites His people to take vengeance, but not the whole
land; the rest will be saved. So says Paul \[Rom. 11, 1.\] 2c. And he
preserves his honor, lest the Gentiles say, \"Where is now their GOt?\"
2c. Spare your honor if you will not spare ours. Here you have quite
evidently a text that the prophet is not speaking of the caterpillars
and locusts, but of nations, namely the Assyrians, \"that \[there\] may
be an end\" 2c. before the kingdom of Christ. It is a general
exhortation to the people of all his time. Of the bodily disturbance of
the land this chapter says. It is a strong prayer, as he \"presses
upon\" GOtte his honor, like Moses in the wilderness \[Ex. 32, 12.\]:
\"Oh, yes\", only destroy, then the Egyptians will say 2c. He
immediately holds up his honor to him. He will

1\) In our template only: ubsra instead of: 8UA6nt68 ukvru.

forced not to rage against the people 2c. When the godly were taken out,
he raged 2c.

**V. 18. So then the LORD will be jealous for his land.**

What follows are more words expressing a wish than reality, or rather
they express the possibility or stand conditionally: If you do so 2c.,
so, he would zeal and spare.

**V. 19. \[And the LORD will answer and say to his people\].**

Jerome has indicative speeches \[in the Vulgate: respondit et dixit,
instead of\] et responderet et diceret \[he would answer and say; as if
they had converted. But I do not believe that they did all this 2c.
because one did not lie that this history had happened by the Assyrian,
that he had been \[v. 20.\] \"cast out into hasty desolate land\" 2c.
2) - Vinum, \"must.\" It indicates what the Lord would do if he were
sorry for the evil, if they were converted. It shows that this
conversion would not be in vain 3) if they were converted: You will come
to know by experience that you have not hoped in vain. - \"To shame,\"
lest they rule over you and boast against me and against you.

**V. 20. And will the one from midnight 2c.**

\[He calls the enemy\] by a very general name. \"I will drive him far
from you,\" \"if only you will become pious.\" Inviam: arid.
\"Desolate,\" desolate. \"The sea toward morning,\" where 4) Sodom
perished. Extremum, that is, the tail or \"the end.\" The sea toward
evening is to be understood by the \"uttermost sea\". Putredo or stink.
Quia superbe egit, that is, for the LORD is able to do great things. If
ye humble yourselves and repent, 2c. as if to say, \"If ye will but be
converted\"; if

2\) The preceding is in the Weimar edition incorrectly still connected
with the interpretation of the 18th verse. In the Altenburg manuscript
it is found only in the 2V. Verse, where it can very well be brought.
Likewise in the Hall manuscript.

> 3\) Instead of krustra msaru, read krustruneaM, 4) Instead of ut, we
> have assumed ubi.

1668 **L. XXV, 24** f. Interpretation of Joel (3.), Cap. 2, 20-26. 1669

also the enemy comes, \"will well muffle him, throwing one piece there,
the other there\" 2c., \"will bring him far enough from you\", he shall
not know where to stay. Between these two seas is the land of Judea.
\[I\] \"will put him into\" the sea toward the morning \"with his head,
with his legs into\" that toward the evening. It cannot be understood of
Hezekiah\'s 1) \[salvation\] 2c. in the days of Sanherib, but the
prophet will make them safe because of the enemies 2c. If they repent
2c. he will do something gloriously, \"will do a righteous thing to him
\[the enemy\].\" The Lord \"is able to do great things\" and he will do
them splendidly if you are converted.

**V. 21. The Lord can do great things.**

Magnificavit, that is, he has done in a glorious way. He again comforts
all \[land, people and livestock\] in turn, just as he has terrified
before. Everything is to be taken in the conjunctive, rather
conditionally.

**V. 22. For the dwellings in the wilderness shall be green.**

Speciosa deserti, that is the huts, wooden dwellings, where shepherds
are, Attulit: will bear abundant and full fruit. Virtutem suam dederunt,
that is, they will give their ability, their strength, that is, all they
can. The fruit, whether of men or of God, of trees, of animals, the
Hebrew language calls power. The trees give what they are able. In the
78th Psalm, v. 51: \"The first heirs\" (primitias) 2c.

**V. 23. Rejoice and be glad.**

You will rejoice and be glad. For he has given (dedit), that is, he will
give. A teacher of righteousness; better, a rain of mercy or grace. XXXX
3) giving much trouble to the translators. It means \"teacher\" and
\"rain.\" He speaks

1\) Instead of LsäseNias in our template will read Luseliias.

2\) In our original, certainly erroneously: \"heil\". Compare our note
to the first relation (Col. 1451).

3\) In our original: vorn; Hallische Handschrift correctly: \"mor\"\";
however, the Weimar edition seems to have regarded this as the ablative
of mos.

not from a teacher, but from a rain that the LORD will give to the land,
that is, mercifully, graciously, \"to do gladly and kindly.\" Ps. 24:5
\[Vulg.\], \"He shall receive blessings from the LORD, and mercy. \"2c.
Descendere faciet, that is, \"he will send down\" 2c. These two rains
the Scripture has; he indicates the early rain and the latter rain, that
is, alternately he will send rain so that the land will not be dried up
by drought. That is, he will give rain \"in due season.\" \"Early,\"
when it must grow, and after, that it may not wither 2c. Sicut in
principio, that is, \"as before.\"

**V. 24: That the threshing floors be full of grain.**

Namely, when you convert. A declaration of the promise.

**V. 25 \[Who were my great army, which I sent among you\] 4)**

\[Fortitudo mea\] magna, add \"will be\". Misi: which I will send. I
will not only destroy the enemy, but will compensate you exceedingly
abundantly for the damage you have suffered. I will restore to you the
power, exceedingly rich fortune, my great fortune will be among you.

**V. 26. that you should have enough to eat (Et^5^ ) comedetis
comedentes).**

And if ye be converted, ye shall have enough to eat. \[The doubling of
the verb is\] a Hebrew way of speaking, \[as\] ridens ri-

4\) Vulgate: I\'ortituäo mea ma\^na smeine Kraft Wird groß seines, yuaru
misi in vos.

5\) In the Erlangen edition, a sie is added after Dt, both in the
rendering of the Vulgate text and in the keyword to the gloss: si
eonversi kusritis. What the Erlanger read as st sie, the Weimar edition
makes the first keyword of the 27th verse and offers: Ltkmetis with
addition of both the gloss just quoted and what the Erlanger says is the
first gloss to senapitöruum, namely: huain Perpetua sit statura ista
keneäiotio. Then follows in the Weimar sempiternurn as a keyword, which
nevertheless belongs to the 26th verse 2c. We have followed the
Altenburg manuscript in the overall arrangement, because here the matter
seems to us to be rather in a mess. Although the sro of the Erlangen
edition is not in the Vulgate, it could serve here as a clue as to where
the gloss belongs.

**1670** L. XXV, 2S-28. interpretations on the prophets. **1671**

debit \[he will laugh very much\], gaudens gaudebit \[he will rejoice
very much\] 2c. God punishes in such a way that he wants his remnant to
be blessed 2c. He uses the threat to make them convert if they do not
convert 2c. - Sempiternum \[eternal, indicates) how permanent this
blessing will remain. Sempiternum is set for an indefinite time. He
means to say this, \"And my people shall be put to shame no more.\" It
is understood of this time, \"because this kingdom endureth,\" and this
prophet 2c. Non ultra 1) is written in the history of Elisha \[2 Kings
6:23\], \"Since that time the men of war came no more.\" \[This is
said\] of the temporal destruction (if they do not repent) and the
restoration (if they repent).

V. 27. **And no one more.**

There is no other besides me. All the prophets used to add this
restriction, Moses \[5th book, 4, 35. 39.), the Psalms, Peter. 2) -
\[\"My people\] shall be put to shame no more.\" He repeats the same.

Cap. 3, 1. **and after this.**

This does not have to be related to the Assyrians. 3)

This passage has been treated by Peter in the Acts of the Apostles, Cap.
2, 17. ff., by Peter. The prophets are familiar with the fact that the
thing of which they prophesy (as we speak of the last judgment) refers
to Christ, although they are all sent to proclaim temporal punishment or
blessing. Joel has the people before, which 2c. now he passes from the
present people to the future 2c. He leaves aside what has happened in
the meantime 2c. First of all, it should be noted that the Holy Spirit
is poured out in two ways: in manifestation and in hidden inspiration.
Here he speaks of the Holy Spirit, who is manifestly poured out, who is
proved by signs and wonders, and who is tangibly manifested, for he
wants to speak of the raising up of the

1\) The Weimar has amplius as an addition for the gap in the Erlanger,
but the Vulgate has uitra.

2\) The preceding is inserted into the previous section in the Weimar
edition after the gloss to sempitsrnuin.

3\) The Weimar edition has drawn this to v. 27.

Kingdom of Christ and the end of the present people. It will be a new
synagogue that will be ruled more wonderfully than the other one; it
will be a kingdom without any respect of persons; they will be ruled by
God through the Holy Spirit. It will be a far different kingdom than the
previous one; it will be a spiritual kingdom, which the Holy Spirit
shall rule; therefore it is necessary that it be made known by signs and
wonders. The old synagogue was ruled by a worldly order. \[Jer. 31,
33.:) \"I will put my law in their hearts\" 2c. \"They shall all be
taught of GOD\" \[John 6:45\]. 4) Herewith this prophecy is true. What
is not the Holy Spirit is not of God. This text speaks of the manifest
bestowal of the Spirit; this is fulfilled on the day of Pentecost. Now
that the church is established and the world is filled with the gospel
(as it says in the letter to the Ephesians \[Cap. 1, 10. Rom. 15,
19.\]), the signs and wonders cease. But this text does not have to
refer to our times, not to me and you 2c. What God does between me and
Himself is not signs and wonders. To each one the Spirit is given, but
the public manifestation of the Spirit is given for the benefit of
others \[1 Cor. 12:7.), \"that \[it\] may break forth.\" GOD gave it
then for a sign to confirm His word, Kingdom 2c. He is talking about the
Holy Spirit being shown publicly. All the time the Holy Spirit was
there, but He is not all the time publicly proved. This revelation and
outpouring of the Holy Spirit came upon all flesh, but not the gift
itself; all the world saw the Spirit in the apostles. And \[Isa. 40, 5.
52, 10.) all flesh shall see the salvation of God, which thou hast
prepared before all nations \[Luc. 2, 31.\]. \"Preach the gospel to
every creature\" \[Marc. 16. 15.\]. Christ is revealed that all flesh
should behold him. So the Holy Spirit is poured out and revealed that
all might see Him. He speaks of the public manifestation of the Holy
Spirit, who was poured out. He is both publicly shown and poured in for
the benefit of others. Our \[prophets\]

4\) Weimar edition: \"fl.Düess. 4, 9)\".

[1672 L. XXV, 28 s. Interpretation of Joel (3.), Cap. 3, 1-3.
1673]{.underline}

boast of their spirit. It is not enough to have the infused Spirit; that
is sufficient for you; but in order to teach, you must prove the Spirit
with certain signs. I can prove it to you in the Scriptures. We have no
other manifestation of the Holy Spirit than that which is in the
Scriptures. I cannot say anything about me.

This text expressly speaks of another kingdom, 2c., the Holy Spirit is
sent, and it is publicly demonstrated in the world. So says Augustine.

**And they shall prophesy.**

This is said against the reputation of the persons. \"The\" Holy Spirit
\"will come along\"; he will hit whoever he wants, not only the priests
and Levites. Before it was not permitted for the women to speak 2c. Paul
says \[1 Cor. 14, 34. f.\], the women shall not be permitted to speak
2c.; \"yea,\" when the men are present in their house, they may do it
2c. There are three kinds of divine illumination: divination, dreams and
visions. And this is the summa: \"prophecy\" is where loud and clear the
mysteries of Christ are proclaimed \"dreams\" \[as\] in Daniel, where
pictures are darkly sketched which cannot be understood except by an
interpreter 2c.; \"visions\" as here in Joel and Amos 2c. In this way,
GOD enlightens the human heart either by a clear prophecy or by a dream
or by a vision.

Cap. 3:2 \[**I will also pour out my spirit on both servants and maids
at the same time\].**

\"My servants\" \[is in the Vulgate\]. \"My\" is not in the Hebrew. 2) -
As if to say, Now you have distinctions of persons. But this difference
I will abolish, and will make a priest of a servant, and a maid 2c.
\"That is\" \"spoken against\" the priests. He that speaketh the
mysteries of Christ hath the Holy One.

1\) Instead of propketartz, it would be better to read xroxtietantur.

2\) This gloss is already at the beginning of the previous verse in our
original.

Spirit; yet we have erected distinctions of persons. He wants to give
the spirit to be seen publicly, because he says:

Cap. 3, **3. and will give miraculous signs.**

With this one piece \"we want to endure our prophets well long enough\".
This must be held against them. They will not do that; \"will leave it\"
2c. This public manifestation of the Spirit must not be separated from
the inward infusion of the Spirit. In the Old Testament there was \"a
mirror fencing,\" not as in the establishment of this new kingdom and
people 2c. \[As it is written in Haggai 3) \[Cap. 2, 7.\] he moved the
whole earth and heaven 2c. at the establishment of the new kingdom, so
that our faith would be exceedingly firm and certain, yes, he proved it
by signs and wonders. He confirmed the new word by new and unheard-of
signs, wonders and extraordinary things. Notice how it happened with the
law 2c. \[Ex. 19, likewise\] with the gospel. All this serves to put to
shame the masters of lies, who will indeed come with signs and wonders
2c. The whole earth and heaven \"shall be moved\" so that all creatures
will know that there is a new word and that there is no one who does not
know this event 2c.

**Blood 2c. 4)**

Where these signs happened, I do not know with certainty. It is certain
that they happened at the time of the Passion of Christ, and when the
Gospel was present. The smoke, I believe, occurred at the sending of the
Spirit 2c. There, I believe, the \"vapor of smoke\" 5) was the glorious
miracle and sign by which the presence of the Holy Spirit was indicated.
As Peter preached, he fell upon the Gentiles 2c. \[Apost. 10, 44.\],
just as he fell on us visibly \[v. 47.\], namely in the form of fire.

3\) In the original: In Hiaeuk.

4\) Here the Weimar edition has by mistake already the number of the
following verse, which is repeated on the next page.

5\) In both the Erlangen and Weimar editions: \"vorpoten lumi\"; but in
the original (we presume) will be found vnporern kurai, which is in the
Vulgate. According to this we have translated.

16742 XXV. 2S-SI. Interpretations on the prophets. 1675

I do not know what \"blood\" is, whether it is said of real blood or of
blood in figurative speech, as it is often used. I would like to explain
it by redness, if I dare. The Hebrew word often means redness, as in the
Song of Songs. Otherwise I read nothing of blood at this time. A bold
interpretation uses this of the blood of Christ and the martyrs. Here
\[at the sending of the Holy Spirit) was redness and wind \[Apost. 2, 2.
3.); this indicated the ardent love. Whoever wants to \"look further\",
let him draw the signs to the last day, which will be preceded by these
signs, as Christ prophesies to Luke in the 19th or rather in the 21st
chapter \[v. 11\]. But I would rather interpret all this from the time
of the sending of the Holy Spirit, and that that day 2c. is the day of
the revealed gospel.

Cap. 3, 4. **\[The moon shall be turned into blood.) 1)**

That the moon is turned into blood and becomes like blood is a Hebrew
way of speaking, as in the Revelation of John \[Cap. 6, 12.), where we
would say it becomes like blood 2c. - \"The terrible \[day of the
LORD\"\] is the one to be feared, the one to be held in reverence, as
\[also\] GOD is called in Scripture, \[Gen. 28, 17. says Jacob:) \"How
holy \[terribilis - terrible\] is this place!\" that is, to hold in
great honor, namely with filial reverence.

Cap. 3, 5 \[**And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call upon
the name of the LORD shall be saved\].**

Et erit is as much as: This is how it will happen. - This text moves me
to understand the foregoing from the day of the revelation of the
Gospel. He who shone forth, the great light of righteousness, is Christ.
These signs are given to confirm that the Spirit was given and sent 2c.
And it will come to pass at the time when these signs shall be, and when
the Spirit shall have descended \[that the name of the

1\) Only at the following keyword, \"der schreckliche,\" does the Weimar
edition have the new verse number.

will call upon the Lord) 2) 2c. \"Is it not\" before \[also\] \"done?
Yes.\" But he is speaking here of the public manifestation of the
invocation. \[Ps. 145, 18.:) \"The LORD is near unto all them that call
upon him.\" This invocation is to be revealed to the whole world, the
revealed ministry of the Spirit is to be displayed to the whole world
2c. This saying nullifies everything there is only ever human power 2c.
The prophet does not place salvation in our righteousness, but in the
invocation of the name. But what is \"being saved\"? It is to be
delivered from sin, death and all evils, and to pass from this life into
another life. This comes from the Holy Spirit, who is poured out on all
flesh. He shall cause the name of the Lord to be called upon 2c. See
Paul Rom. 10, 14. f.: From the sending of the Spirit comes preaching,
from preaching comes hearing, from hearing comes faith, from faith comes
calling 2c. Our blessedness is in the power of God who sends His Spirit,
and not in our merits. \"Calling\" is standing in line for mercy. \"The
name of the LORD,\" he says, indicating the kingdom of Christ. Our
blessedness stands in the mercy that is pleaded and invoked 2c. Death,
sin, and therefore the need to call upon the name of the Lord always
remain.

**\[For in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there will be salvation 2c.\]**

\"For in Mount Zion,\" there will be the foundation of salvation; so say
all the prophets. Thus says Isaiah \[Cap. 2, 3.), \"From Zion shall go
forth the law,\" 2c. \"The forgiveness of sins had to be preached, and
lift up at Jerusalem\" 2c., says Lucas \[Cap. 24, 47.). God took great
care with His people to make them certain of the place, the time, the
persons, the signs, even though it is not necessary for salvation; but
He did it in order to confirm His teaching and His word 2c. \"He is so
hostile to the flying spirits.

2\) This addition is inserted by us according to the Altenburg
manuscript. - The following words read in our original: \"ist dem nicht
ante geschehen? Iha.\"

1676 L. XXV. S1-3S. Interpretation of Joel (3rd), cap. 3, 5-8. 1677

being. This had to be Zion\" so that it could be written: The word of
the Lord lifted up from Jerusalem. In the beginning it was necessary
that the word was bound; now it is no longer bound 2c. He explicitly
adds: \"As the Lord promised\", as if he wanted to say: Because the Lord
wants the word to begin there, it is something great, otherwise it would
not be necessary 2c.

**\[Also with the rest whom the Lord will call.\]**

In residuis, that is, \"among the rest. The Lord has raised up teachers
and ministers of the Word among the rest of the earth. They will make no
distinction among the people 2c. This is the main part of this prophecy.

**The third chapter.**

We want to let this chapter \"remain\" with the kingdom of Christ. I
consider it to be an explanation of the previous chapter.

At the time of Joel the neighboring nations were eager to destroy this
Jewish people 2c. As if he wanted to say: The time will come that the
vengeance of the neighbors will cease; I 1) will again avenge my people.
Only rage, only rage, 2) act according to your desires; the time will
come when everything will be repaid. He describes the rage and malice of
the enemies against the people of Israel and postpones vengeance until
the future of Christ 2c.

**V. 6 \[For behold, in those days and at that same time\].**

It is a Hebrew phrase: \"in the days\" \[and the same as\] \"at the same
time.\"

**When I turn the prison of Judah and Jerusalem.**

\[This is when I \"will save\" it from the right captivity by which it
is held in sins 2c.

**V. 7 I will gather all the nations together and bring them down to the
Valley of Jehoshaphat.**

This did not happen, and it is not right that it should be postponed to
the Last Judgment.

1\) Weimarsche: ergo instead of: exo.

2\) It seems to us from what the Altenburg manuscript offers here: SM
saeviant st advorgentur impias xenttzs 2c. that should be read: turits,
turits instead of: \"furt, furt\" in our original.

refers, according to my opinion 2c. It is known \[that it is said, the
last judgment of God will be on the Mount of Olives. The inconsistency
of this opinion forces that one must understand the valley Josaphat in
spiritual meaning. Therefore he speaks of the preaching of the gospel,
which brings together all Gentiles and all people 2c. He looks to the
time of the sending of the Spirit, when all the Gentiles are gathered
together through the preaching of the gospel 2c. Often the prophets,
when they want to veil the prophecy, make a generic name (appellativum)
out of a proper name. And so the church is the valley of Jehoshaphat, as
elsewhere the valley of Achor and above in Hosea Gilead stands for the
synagogue. - \"In the valley of Jehoshaphat.\" \[Jehoshaphat,\] that is,
the judging one. \[But here it\] does not say so, but he understands the
church as if to say, \"I will\" once \"also do a calamity and pay well\"
2c. It is a delay of the fleshly vengeance on the spiritual 2c. He says
of all the Gentiles, although not all the Gentiles persecuted Israel 2c.
Therefore one cannot assume 2c. They are present evils, which he
reproaches and postpones the vengeance to the future, namely to the
preaching of the gospel.

**V. 8. and have given the boys for food, and sold the maidens for wine
(Et posuerunt).**

The Hebrew word is ambiguous. - That is, the Jewish boys made them
servants and the girls, the young-

1678xxv , 33 f. Interpretations on the prophets. 1679

fraueu, \"to maids\" (zcu shun), and have made the boys into
gift-whores, and the girls into gift-whores, that is, that they had to
be slaves and sell the wine, that is, they have dealt with my people as
they wished, therefore I will avenge this with the gospel. The revenge
of the gospel is to turn enemies into friends 1) and masters into
servants and maids 2c.

**V. 9 And you of Zor and Zidon and all the border of the Philistines,
what have you to do with me?**

I do not suffer that the Jews draw this text to their dreams, namely to
the temporal punishment. \"What will you do to me?\" Instead of
\"border\" is in Hebrew (Galilea). So \"hastening,\" as soon as the
gospel shall have come, that I may make you friends, who are now
enemies.

**V. 10. My beautiful jewels.**

\"The pretty, beautiful vessels, dishes\" that were in the temple. See
the Psalm \"By the waters \[of Babel\] \[Ps. 137, 2) 7.): \"Clean off\",
\"make it up with the city\".

**V. 12 3) Behold, I will raise them up out of the place.**

This text compels Me to interpret as I have interpreted, \"What will I
do?\" This I will do 2c. The opinion of this chapter seems to be a
twofold one: the first of an outward and bodily vengeance against the
Gentiles; but here it does not please me; the other of the spiritual
vengeance, namely of the Gospel, since all the Gentiles will be brought
(vindicabuntur) into the church of God by punishments and will be
punished 2c., and this opinion we have accepted.

**I want to awaken**

Through the gospel, which has gone not only to the Jews but also to the
Gentiles, but first to the Jews. As if he wanted to say: \"I also want
to take revenge once\" 2c.

1\) araieos is missing in the Weimar edition.

2\) Weimarsche: \"\^136, v. 7\^\" and likewise in the margin.

3\) The Weimar edition has placed the number of this verse only before
the following keyword.

**V. 13. \[And will sell your sons and your daughters again by (in
manibus) the children of Judah).**

In stands for per, in German: \"through\". - In manibus, that is,
\"through the children of Judah,\" it will be they who will sell you. 4)

**They should sell them to them in Imperial Arabia.**

\"Imperial Arabia\" (Sabaea) is a land farther from Jerusalem than
Greece is from the Philistines. There is a threefold Arabia: the stony,
the desert and the happy. Through the figure of the synecdoche he says:
I will again sell you into distant lands, to those in Imperial Arabia.
This has happened through the preaching of Paul and others. The
Christians have no certain place on earth; wherever the Lord throws
them, there they are. - \"The Lord has spoken it\", as if he wanted to
say: \"It must be done\"; this says he who has the power to carry it
out.

**V. 14. 5) Cry this out among the Gentiles.**

\"Proclaim\" what has just been said, that the Philistines will be sold
like this; proclaim it through the gospel. As he often uses images, so
also here. \[Ps. 118:22:) \"The stone which the builders rejected has
become the cornerstone,\" that is, the king of the Christian people.
\[Isa. 28, 16.:\] \"Behold, I lay a foundation stone in Zion,\" 2c. This
is to Christ. A word gives light to the images. 6)

**Sanctify an argument.**

Namely with the sword of the spirit. - \"Awaken the strong,\" the
giants, \"the great heroes.\" - \"Let all the men of war come and go
up,\" \"all that is used in war\".

**V. 15. Make your plowshares into swords.**

That is, prepare for war, seize that which is for war. Isaiah \[Cap.

4\) In the Weimar edition, these glosses are added to the preceding
verse.

5\) Here, again, the verse number is missing in the Weimar edition; the
same is only placed before the following keyword,

6\) This passage is very unclear and incomprehensible here; therefore,
see the first relation, Col. 1470 in this volume.

[1680 L. XXV. p4-36. interpretation of Joel (3.), cap. 3, 15-19.
1681]{.underline}

2, 4.\] Reverses this 2c. \[But here it is said:\] The utensils that
belong to peace, make them swords 2c. \[Christ says, Luc. 22, 36.:\]
\"He that hath two garments, let him sell the one, and buy a sword.\" It
is the highest war and the highest peace in the kingdom of Christ. The
stubborn opinions and errors that are in the heart, smite them, that is,
seize the word of God. - \[\"The weak say:\] I am strong\", \"I am a
hero\". He incites the whole nation to a glorious war. This actually
refers to the Christians. \[God\'s\] power is mighty in the weak \[2
Cor. 12:9.\] Our weapons are not carnal \[2 Cor. 10, 4.\], but are based
on GOD. We are naked \[1 Cor. 4, 11.\] and have no place \[Luc. 9, 58.\]
2c. \"A whimsical war!\" \[Christians are\] weak, that is, powerless
people who suffer many things, death 2c., and yet these dying ones will
say, \"I am strong.\" They are a sacrifice of feg to the world \[1 Cor.
4, 13.\]

**V. 16. \[Redden yourselves, and come hither, all ye Gentiles\].**

Erumpite, \"out!\" all the Gentiles around, and gather yourselves
together. - \"The strong ones,\" that is, the mighty ones in this
assembly. The gospel will stir up the whole world, and yet he speaks
only to the Philistines, while he understands all the Gentiles. Most
powerfully he kills by the word of his mouth.

**V. 17. \[The Gentiles will make up and come up\].**

Consurgant \[they are to set out\] \"do you not hear where you are to
go?\" I indicate to you the place where all the Gentiles will gather,
namely the church, where the Word of God is, which flies over the whole
earth like the sun. All shall be gathered under the Word, though not all
believe. \"There we will strike\", there, in the Valley of Jehoshaphat,
under the shadow of the Word of GOD. Refer everything to the Day of the
Gospel, not to the Day of Judgment.

**V. 18. Strike the sickle, for the harvest is ripe.**

These are exhortations in figurative speeches to drive the word. When
the word comes, the world will find it sufficiently prepared, therefore
he says: \"Strike the sickle\" 2c. The winepress, it is said, the
\"winepress is laid full, everything will be full, 1) what is under
it\". The whole earth circle he looks at as his threshing floor and
winepress 2c. \[Isa. 63:3:\] \"I tread the winepress alone.\" It is the
voice of the gospel; by the word he treads the winepress. This is the
power of the Word and the Evangelii; it is a prize of the virtues of the
Word of GOD 2c.

**For their wickedness is great. 2)**

\[They\] \"have done enough\". In the Acts of the Apostles it says
\[Cap. 17, 30.\]: God has overlooked the past times. Now another time is
dawning in which they must mend their ways. The new light is near, the
day of the Evangelii \"is not far\".

**V. 19. There will be heaps of people here and there in the valley of
judgment (in valle concisionis).**

In Hebrew, XXXX is \"a great multitude\". In the name Abraham it
indicates the multitude of children 2c. That is, \"great heaps of people
here 3) and there,\" many hosts or heaps or multitudes, and not in One
place 2c. - Concisionis. Isaiah uses this word \[XXXX\] \[Cap. 10, 22.
23.\]: a word that controls or abbreviates (abbrevians \[Rom. 9, 28.\]).
Likewise Dan. 7,^4^ ) 25th, of the Antichrist, it is: \"to take in
brevity.\" Come, ye nations, ye peoples, in the Thale appointed
beforehand, \"a named, appointed Thale.\" ^5^) This is the \"valley of
judgment\" (concisionis). It means a circumscribed and limited place, a
designated, certain one. In Daniel it actually says: He \[the
Antichrist\] has his certain, determined time; \"it must go like this\".
Thus \[Rom. 9, 28. Vulg.\] verbum abbreviatum: \"it must so go\" 2c.
Therefore it is not the valley of Jehoshaphat.

1\) Weimar edition: \"wol\"; the Erlangen edition has correctly:
\"vol\".

2\) This keyword with its interpretation is in our template only at the
end of the following section.

3\) In our template: \"hyn\".

4\) In the original vanislik IX. Compare the note to this passage in the
first relation, Col. 1474.

5\) In our template: \"a named bstimpten that\".

1682 xxv, p6-38. interpretations on the prophets. 1683

**V. 20. Sun and moon are darkened.**

This is quite an actual way in which the prophets speak. In the 5th
chapter of the Book of Wisdom it is described that the wicked \"make
themselves believe\" that the whole world \"perishes\" when they feel
the judgment of God. 1) - \"Be darkened\" by the very fierce strife and
many beatings and wrath, as happens in great wars. Here he is talking
about a spiritual war. In a physical war, heaven and earth seem to merge
2c. The terror and shudder of death is also added.

**V. 21. And the LORD will roar out of Zion.**

He will not add sword or iron, but the word alone will be there to do it
2c. He will scare all the nations with the gospel. Isaiah \[Cap. 13,
13.\], also Haggai \[Cap. 2, 7.\] says: Once more I will move heaven and
earth. \[It\] \"hath stirred\" the heavens and the earth, \"hath. had to
do with the word.\" - \"But the LORD will be a refuge for his people.\"
\"There it is clear\" that it is a spiritual war through which the HErr
will reign in the confidence of his people 2c. He himself will be their
hope (spes \[in the Vulg.\]), better: \"the refuge\" (fiducia) of his
people, their \"defiance, comfort, confidence.\" Therefore, all swords
2c. will cease, 2) it will cease \"our fortune\", our powers 2c.

**V. 22. Then Jerusalem will be holy, and no stranger will walk through
her.**

This has never been fulfilled except through Christ. The gospel and the
word of God began on Mount Zion, and this makes the

1\) The preceding reads in the original: -So/ e/ /\"-rs Sie proprie
loquuvtur propUetae. Sapikutiae V. Impii beuchten totum munäum umbgehen
oum 86Ntiuut juäioium äoi.

2\) Both the Erlangen and the Weimar editions offer here, contrary to
the train of thought: V688udunt vom6068 ßlackim. Therefore, we have
assumed according to the Altenburg manuscript: o6ssadnnt OMU68 Zladii.

Place sacred. \"Now that is not there.\" He is not talking about the
earthly Jerusalem and Zion, but the church 2c.

**V. 23 \[At the same time the mountains will be dripping with sweet
wine\].**

Instead of dulcedinem \[in the Vulgate\], it should rather be must or
honey jelly; \"of sweet, fine must\". You see that this is all
figurative speech. In all places where the word of God is filed, the
exceedingly sweet doctrine of the gospel will be preached, a sweet milk
to the young children 2c. The sweetness of the word is indicated here. -
And by all the streams, there shall be no more drought and barrenness
2c.; the fountain, which is Christ, \"a spring (\"pornquel\") shall come
on.\"-\"The stream\" (torrentem), where there is water when it rains 2c.
Instead of \"the stream\" read: the valley Sittim. What this place is,
see in the book of Joshua \[Cap. 2, 1\] and in the 4th book of Moses
\[Cap. 25, 1. 33, 49. 5 Mos. 34, 8\]. It is a region in the land of Moab
beyond Jordan, not far from the Dead Sea toward the east 2c. Out of the
land of Edom into the territories of the Gentiles, there \[will flow\]
this spring 2c. This indicates the course of the gospel word through the
whole world rc, \"as if a brook broke out and\" flowed from Jerusalem to
Sittim 2c.

**V. 24. But Egypt shall become desolate.**

This is the conclusion. It briefly repeats the power of war. When it
will happen like this, \"Egypt will become desolate\" from this water
and sweetness. The kingdom of Christ is described. They have committed
much iniquity against the children of Judah, \"I will avenge it,\" with
the sweetness of the gospel word. These figurative speeches force the
readers to understand it spiritually.

**V. 26. And I will not leave their blood unscented (Et mundabo etc.
).**

Because the law has not purified so far, I want to purify 2c.

**In Zion.**

That is, in the church.

**End of Joel.**

**\
**1684 \". xxv, Ns-s8i. Interpretation of Amos (I), preface. W. vi, 2434
f. 1685

**G. D. Martin Luther\'s interpretation of the prophet Amos.**

1\. Luther\'s lectures on the prophet Amos,

according to the Altenburg manuscript.\*)

**Held i\" December 1524 and in January 1525. Printed in Dietrich\'s
edition 1536, later Altenburg manuscript 1884.**

Newly translated from the Latin.

> **\[Preface on the Prophet Amos.\]**

Because we are flesh and blood, because we constantly carry and have our
most harmful enemies with us, and Satan does not let up in the meantime,
we need much instruction and God\'s word, so that we are not seduced by
the flesh and overcome by Satan, which can happen very easily, and
dampen the spirit. Therefore the apostle so diligently exhorted that we
should let the word of God dwell among us abundantly in all wisdom 2c.,
Col. 3, 16. For as the body must perish if it is not given bread and
nourishment by which it is sustained, so it is also the case for the
soul if it is not given the right food, the word of God. For man does
not live on bread alone, but on the word of God, Deut. 8:3. 1)

**What the Prophet Aims to Do.**

The prophet Amos was a contemporary of Hosea, 2) which the titles
indicate. Both whis-

1\) This section is missing in the Latin Wittenberg and in all German
editions.

2\) D. i: and of Isaiah,

3\) said against the kingdom of Ephraim and foretold the same future
calamities. For God the Lord observes that whenever a great change of
things is imminent, whenever a particular calamity threatens, He sends
His prophets or ministers of the word to proclaim His word, predicting
the future calamity, so that through the preached word they may convert
some, even if only a few, hearts and bring them to repentance. Without a
doubt, since the Word of God shines so clearly to us, we too must expect
a great change in things; by the way, how it will be or when it will
take place, the Lord knows. Therefore, at the time when the miserable
desolation of Israel was imminent, he sent the prophet Amos, and he also
sent other excellent prophets to preach his word and to remind Israel of
the future desolation and mourning, so that they would not all perish
completely, but 4) by means of

3\) D.: He prophesies

4\) D. continues: at least some would be called to repentance and learn
how they should comfort themselves in the future misfortune. But as the
greater part always despised the word, as 2c.

\*) We see ourselves compelled to reproduce also this prophet according
to the Altenburg manuscript, as has already been done with the first
relation of the prophet Joel; the first note to this (Col. 1414 in this
volume) gives the necessary information. Therefore, it only remains for
us to indicate the location of our writing. According to the Altenburg
manuscript, it is first printed in the Erlangen edition, 6X6L. opp.,
tom. XXV, p. 377 and in the Weimar one, vol. XIII, p. 158. In Veit
Dietrich\'s edition, which appeared at Strasbourg in 1536 (see above
Col. 1415), it is reproduced in the Latin Wittenberg edition (1552),
torn. IV, lol. 519 and in the Jena one (1603), tom. Ill, lol. 494 d.
This was translated into German in 1555 by 14. Paul Kröl and included in
the Wittenberg edition (1556), vol. VIII, p. 411 d, and from it passed m
the Altenburg, vol. VI, p. IM); in the Leipzig, vol. VIII, p. 267 and
into the old edition of Walch, vol. VI, 2434. We now give a new
translation according to the Weimar edition and add, as we did with
Joel, the more important deviations of Dietrich in notes. For the sake
of brevity, we denote them in the following by D., and an addition by f.

[1686 L. XXV. 381-383. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
243Ü-243S. 1687]{.underline}

The word of God, which was abundantly offered, would call them to
repentance. But as the word has always been despised, just as it is
despised today, so also at that time the word did not take place among
them; they did not respect the word and the preachers of the word. Few
had the Word at heart, and with these, as few as they were, God gave
salvation through His Word. The rest of the multitude is rightly 1)
rejected by GOD because they despised, mocked and blasphemed the Word,
because they dishonored, mocked, treated shamefully, finally even killed
the prophets who were sent to proclaim salvation. 2) This is the
appearance, image and form of the Word of God. Therefore, there is no
reason for us to hope for anything better.

It is therefore the summa and the purpose of the prophecy of Amos: he
punishes and warns Israel that they may go into themselves and repent of
their ungodliness, so that it will happen that they can beware of the
impending calamity from God\'s judgment. But his preaching has been
despised beyond all measure. For besides that the word and the preachers
of the word of the world and the wisdom of the flesh are very repugnant,
Amos also prophesied at such a time when the kingdom of Israel was in
the highest bloom and everything went out happily (when Hosea also
prophesied). For he prophesied under Jeroboam, a famous and valiant,
though godless king, who had distinguished himself by many victories and
restored the borders of Israel from Hemath to the sea, which is in the
plain, as it is written in the second book of Kings, Cap. 14, 25.
Therefore, he is called a king by this prosperity.

1\) with right\" is missing from D.

2\) D. †: \"and had to suffer the punishments of their contempt and
security\". After that he continues: This has always been the fate of
the Word and the way of the world, therefore there is no reason that we
should nowadays 2c.

For they think that they have no need of God, and in their delusion they
continue to act ungodly until God\'s judgment seizes them and they
perish. For in vain is the word proclaimed to them, as we see in this
prophet. Therefore, Amos prophesied at a very unfortunate and yet very
opportune time. 3) From all this, we are to learn to take advantage of
the goodness and mercy of God in adversity, but to fear in good times.

3\) Instead of the following in this passage, D. has: \"Although this
has long since been fulfilled, and seems to be of no concern to us, we
should nevertheless be mindful, since the same God still exists who was
at that time and did not tolerate the ungodliness of His people, that we
also have to suffer the same punishments, who wallow in the same sins
and despise the gospel and the holy teachings in an extraordinary way.
For so Paul says \[1 Cor. 10, 11\]: \"All these things happened to them
as an example\", and it should serve us as a testimony\", so that we
first of all recognize our sins and improve our lives, and after that we
also receive the divine mercy, that God may have mercy on us and
preserve for us the gifts that he has given: the word and the knowledge
of God. Furthermore, this prophet has almost nothing to do with anything
but threats and the preaching of the horrors of the future judgment.
Hence he seems to have his name, for Amos means a burden, since he is,
as it were, a hard, burdensome preacher 2c. But he was not of the rank
of prophets, but a shepherd, and wandered from the tribe of Judah to the
kingdom of Israel, and preached there as a stranger. That is why it is
said that he was killed by the priest Amaziah, whom he punishes in the
seventh chapter, v. 17, with a girdle. But at the end of the last
chapter he adds a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ, so that he closes
his book with the preaching of Christ. Twice his testimony is used in
the New Testament, namely by Stephanus, Apost. 7,\*) 42, and by Jacobus,
Apost. 15, 16. The latter uses it against the Jews and proves that they
never obeyed the law of God; the latter against the law itself, which
should not be imposed on Christians.

In the Latin editions: Xvtor. 8,

**\
[1688 ]{.underline}**[\". XLV, \[ss-385. interpretation of Amos (1.),
cap. 1, 1. w. VI. AZ9-2E. **1689**]{.underline}

**\[The first chapter.\]**

**V. 1. This is what Amos saw (Verba Amos).**

\"The words of Amos\" is spoken in the Hebrew manner; we must translate
it in Latin thus: Haec sunt, quae vidit Amos \[\"This is what Amos
saw\"\].

**Who was among the shepherds of Thekoa.**

It is also said later \[Cap. 7, 14\] that Amos was not a prophet, but a
shepherd, that is, that he was not of the lineage or status of the
prophets. For there were various ranks among the Israelite people; some
were prophets, others priests, still others wise men. According to their
discretion the people was governed; they presided over the office of the
word; everything was accepted as inviolable, which they only always
ordered or taught. 1) Therefore they were puffed up and relied on their
reputation; it was considered a blasphemy if one opposed them, because,
as it is said in Jeremiah Cap. 18, 18: \"The priests (they said) cannot
err in the law, and the wise cannot fail in counsel, the prophets cannot
teach wrong.\" But the Lord, in order to prove His contempt for those
who were so arrogant, often raised up lowly men and men of low estate,
who did not belong to the prophetic or priestly estate, that they should
resist them all, blasting them for their ungodliness, as can be seen
everywhere in the prophets. But this is the foolishness of God, by which
He makes the world and the wisdom of the flesh foolishness \[1 Cor.
1:21\]. They were quite worthless people and of low estate, so it seemed
to be a nonsense that they should have been so close to the kings and so
many prophets and priests who presided over the ministry of the Word,
and to one so understanding and versed in the law of the

1\) Here D. continues like this: Therefore they surely despised and
persecuted, like today our adversaries under the name of the church,
puffed up by this prerogative, all who taught against them, as it says
in Jeremiah Cap. 18, 18. 2c.

They wanted to resist the people, who were well instructed by the Lord,
and teach something new against the customary way. Therefore, they were
considered fools, and their word was despised and blasphemed. Therefore
even nowadays to the wise of the world seems to be quite strange
*(παράδοξα)* what is said or written by the gospel of Christ against the
so mighty kingdom of the pope, so long praised by holy men, 2) on whose
side stand the kings, the princes, the most learned, even the whole
world 2c. And this is what the prophet wants, since he calls himself a
shepherd of Thekoa, by which he indicates a low estate and a lowly
person. But this is what the apostle Paul says 1 Cor. 1, 27. that God
chose what is foolish and weak in the sight of the world, to put to
shame the wise and mighty of the world 2c. The Hebrew word translated
here by \"shepherd\" does not actually mean a shepherd, but one who has
much cattle, a lord over cattle, 3) as if to say: a cattle owner.

**What he saw two years before the earthquake.**

Here he indicates the time when he prophesied, namely under Uzziah, the
king of Judah, and Jeroboam, the king of Israel. When this earthquake
happened is not mentioned in the Scriptures, 4) but it is undoubtedly
mentioned in the book of the events in the days of the kings of Israel,
5) whose

2\) The words: \"which is so long - praised\" are missing in D.

3\) D. omits the following words.

4\) Here D. continues like this (until the end of the paragraph): except
for a passage in Zechariah, Cap. 14, 5. But it was without a doubt a
sign of future misfortune, which also always happened with the Gentiles,
as the HiMria of the Gentiles testify, that such signs were followed by
great and terrifying changes of things. So 2c.

5\) in lilrro rerurn diernni re\^nin Israkel. In contrast, in the
Vulgate we find: in lidro verdornin diernni rsANin IsrasI, I Kings 16,
14. 20. 27. 22, 46. 2 Kings 10, 34. In other places: in IU\>ro
serinonnni the-

1690 L. XXV, 385-387. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 2442-2444.
1891

The earthquake is mentioned so often in the books of Kings, but we do
not have it. Zechariah also remembers this earthquake in the fourteenth
chapter, v. 5. Without a doubt, this earthquake, whenever it may have
happened, was a sign of future misfortune, which also always happened
with the Gentiles, as the histories of the Gentiles testify. Thus the
prophet authenticates his sermon as it were with a past sign.

V. 2. **The LORD will roar out of Zion.**

This is the subject (thema) and the purpose (scopus) or the main part of
the whole first chapter, yes, of this whole book. And because it is the
custom of the prophets to use poetic images and ways of speaking, the
prophet moves here completely in this way and is completely poetic. So
it is a metaphor or rather an allegory when he says: \"The Lord will
roar\", by which he indicates the great anger and the threat of God, as
if he wanted to say: The Lord, who is from Zion, who lives in Zion or
has his seat in Jerusalem, this Lord will roar, he is angry, he raises
his mane like an enraged lion: beware, he threatens you with
destruction. For as much as you despise him, yet he threatens that he
will devour you all. 2) But he will use the Assyrian\'s jaws and teeth
to devour you. It will be done for all of you if you do not repent 2c.

ruva Israel, as, 1 Kings 22, 39. 2 Kings 1, 18. Luther translated both
in our Bible: \"in the chronicles of the kings of Israel\". At the time
Luther gave these lectures, he was of the opinion that a lost book was
meant, and only later realized that the books of Chronicles were so
called. This has moved D. to omit it.

1\) It begins like this: The first chapter threatens the neighboring
Gentiles, who plagued the Jews in many ways, who hated them the most
because of their different religion. Satan also helped and incited them
because of his hatred against the future Christ and against the present
worship that the Jews had. But because this is the custom of the
prophets, that they use poetic images and ways of speaking, so the
prophet here is completely poetic and moves in images. It is therefore a
metaphor 2c.

2\) Instead of the following to the end of the paragraph D. has: \"If
you reverse the construction: \'The LORD will roar from Zion, and make
his voice heard from Jerusalem,\' the meaning remains the same.\" This
sentence becomes understandable by what the Zwickau manuscript offers:
\"He will make his voice heard and roar.\"

**That the pastures of the shepherds will stand miserable.**

As if to say, This is what the LORD threatens you with: He will devour
you like this, 3) He will make the land a wasteland, the dwellings
desolate and ruined; mourning will be in the tents, and destruction
where there are shepherds now.

**And the Carmel will wither on top.**

This is again figuratively speaking. Carmel is twofold. Firstly 4) the
one where Nabal dwelt \[1 Sam. 25, 2\], the foolish man, as the
scripture calls him 1 Sam. 25, 25; and its location is toward the south.
Here, however, the prophet speaks of that great and all-known mountain,
which is famous by the good prosperity of all kinds of fruits. Hence the
opinion: Carmel will become a desert, it will not be cultivated, it,
which is now vast and spacious, very fertile and productive, will lie
there completely uncultivated. With these prophetic expressions the
prophet understands at the same time that the whole people 5) shall be
desolate; by the dwellings of the shepherds he understands the people of
low origin and low status; by Carmel he has designated the nobles, the
princes and priests. And of all these he says that they will perish at
the same time. Thus, according to their way, the so-called minor
prophets use more images than the major ones.

V. 3. **For three and four vices of Damascus I will not spare them,
because they have threshed Gilead with iron prongs (Super tribus
sceleribus Damasci).**

Now he continues to interpret in particular what he wants to be
understood by the shepherds\' huts and Carmel. 6) By the way, according
to the Hebrew it should be read more correctly: \"For three and four
vices Damascus\" 2c. Likewise, by what we read \[in the Vulgate\]: with
iron chariots (plaustris), something else is signified in Hebrew; not a

3\) D.: vo6aturu8 instead of voruturu8.

4\) D. has read the Iin the template in

iä 68t: the latter is also often expressed by i.

5\) Instead of \"all the people\" D. has: all ranks of the people, the
highest and the lowest.

6\) D. t: For he threatens the kingdom of Syria that it will be
devastated by the Assyrian.

1692 **XXV, 387-390.** interpretation of Amos (I.), cap. I, 3. **W. VI,
2444-2447.** 1693

It was not a wagon, but a tool with teeth by which the straw was chopped
into fodder for the cattle; this tool is not in use here. I call it a
flail. The same word is found in 1 Chron. 21, 3: \"iron hooks\" 2c. -
\[V. 5. 1) \"The people of Syria shall be carried away to Kir.\"\] It is
badly read \[in the Vulgate\] Syriae Cyrenen, and it is also badly
translated, for Cyrene is between Egypt and the smaller Africa, but the
king of Assyria never subdued Africa and held it. Therefore, instead of:
to Cyrene, it must be read \"gen Kir\" (in Cira). So much of the
grammar.

This passage has been treated in various ways by our commentators. Lyra
thinks, perhaps according to the opinion of the Hebrew interpreters,
that by the three vices are to be understood the sins against the Holy
Spirit, which cannot be forgiven. Jerome interprets even more
inconsistently \[the four sins\] thus: the first is the remembrance of
sin, the second consent, the third works, the fourth impenitence. But
since the text is clear enough in itself, what need is there to invent
improper things? For it is nothing that these people think it is to be
understood of four sins, for he says of seven sins. Therefore, in my
opinion, this is a way of speaking of the Scriptures, the like of which
we read in Leviticus 26:18, 21, 24, where it is repeated several times:
\"I will make it seven times more to punish you; I will make it seven
times more to strike you, I will punish you with seven plagues\" \[v.
21, freely adapted from the Vulgate\]. The number \"seven\" indicates
the perseverance in punishing and visiting them, as if he wanted to say:
I will destroy you completely, 2) I will not let you go.

1\) Because Luther, as he himself notes in the following, is at the word
explanation, he reaches a little ahead. - Instead of (Irenas in the
editions (Jena Eirene) is to be read with the Vulgate 6\^i-6Q6n. -
Cyrene is in Tripoli.

2\) D. leaves out the following in this passage except for the last
sentence and adds: This passage of Amos is also to be understood as if
he wanted to say: Because of three or four sins, that is, because of
their extreme and highest ungodliness, I will destroy them. But this
consists in the fact that they persist in sinning against God, that they
do not stop nor repent, but continue with extreme persistence to sin
ungodly.

I will not lessen my plague against you. This passage of the prophet
Amos is to be understood as if the Lord wanted to say: \"Because they
have persisted in finding against me, because they have not ceased and
have not repented of their ungodliness, but have continued to act
ungodly with extraordinary persistence, therefore I will utterly destroy
and annihilate them. This is my recent opinion of this place and I see
no better.

**That they threshed Gilead with iron prongs.**

He tells the shameful deeds or vices of Damascus, as if he wanted to
say: it has crushed and crushed this country Gilead and made it like
dust, it has crushed it like chaff is crushed on the threshing floor.
Now Gilead is in the half tribe of Manasseh.

**I don\'t want to spare theirs.**

This has been referred to conversion to repentance, which I do not
approve of, but seems to me to be the opinion: I will not deliver you
from the hand of the Assyrian, I will not lessen my punishment nor avert
it, nor will I have mercy on you; I will let the Assyrian rage against
you, just as you have continued to ravage Gilead 2c. And so this word
\[XXX\] 3) is frequently used everywhere in the Psalms. Ps. 6, 5:
\"Turn, O Lord, and save my soul\"; likewise Ps. 90, 13: \"O Lord, turn
again to us.\"

to act. But it is clear that this image is taken from the fact that the
number \"seven\" in the Scriptures is a perfect and principal number,
according to which one begins to count again, as it is seen in the
reckoning of the days, the years 2c. Therefore, three or four sins are
the most extreme sin, which is not recognized, but in which the wicked
continue, and of which they boast as if it were something holy.
Therefore, they not only do not allow it to be punished and reproved,
but defend it by persecuting the true church and the right ministers of
the Word. This is recently 2c.

3\) In the Jena: 8edod; in the Wittenberg: 8 \"Uanuk; in the Weimar and
in the Erlangen: (as.

Dietrich\'s variant).

1694 L. XXV, 390-392. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2448-2450.
1695

**V. 4. I will send a fire.**

By the \"fire\" he indicates the future devastation by the Assyrians 1)
as if he wanted to say: Beware, I will send a fire one day, I will send
many evils upon you, 2) which you will not be able to bear at all.

**V. 5. And I will break the bars of Damascus.**

He figuratively calls the fortifications \"bars\", likewise the nobles
or the strong and those who are able to take up arms against the
advancing Assyrians. 3) Over these \[the strong\], so that they cannot
defend themselves, he says, he will send fear and terror when the king
of Assyria comes upon them like a fire.

**And exterminate the inhabitants.**

That is, I will kill them, destroy them.

**On the field Aven.**

Damascus was situated in a very beautiful plain, not in mountainous
regions, but surrounded all around by the loveliest fields, and it is to
this loveliness that the prophet alludes here, as if to say: you dwell
in a very beautiful and fertile field, the situation of your city is
very pleasant, but you will be destroyed, you will be carried over to
Assyria. - \"Aven\" is what the Hebrew language calls everything that is
not true godliness, instituted according to the word of GOD. The word is
taken from the complaint of the heart, for it actually means
\"trouble\". 4) To these efforts of ungodliness, with which the ungodly
are ab-

1\) \"by the Assyrians\" is missing from D.

2\) D. continues thus: \"by which you will be oppressed.\"

3\) Instead of: \"Asfyrians\" has D.: enemy.

4\) D. brings instead of the following: The prophet seems to have used
the word here actually as the name of a place, although he alludes at
the same time also to the complaint which arises to the godless from
their superstition and self-chosen services, with which they toil in
peril. - Instead of \"trouble\" the original reads: \"mueg\" (after
analogy of Rüge for rest. Cf. Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 699);
from this word the Erlangen edition has read \"inverulu\".

The prophet is alluding to the fact that the people of the world are
struggling by tormenting their consciences with the godless religion of
their own invention.

**Together with the one who holds the scepter, from the pleasure house
\[, I will exterminate them\].**

This is again a paraphrase, namely: I will take away the king and let
him be led away. No matter how many magnificent and splendid buildings
he may have built for himself in the most beautiful place, it will be of
no use to him: he will not use them, for he will be taken away and cast
out.

V. 6. **For the sake of three and four vices Gasa.**

The prophet goes on to frighten all the Gentiles living around Jerusalem
and to make them afraid by the judgment of God, since the king of
Assyria, who was sent against them by the judgment of God, would not
only attack the Israelite people, but also the godless Gentiles, as the
Moabites, Edomites 2c., all of whom the LORD 5) roared at with his roar,
indicating that they would perish at the same time as Israel; but yet
this prophecy is directed most and chiefly against Israel. What kind of
captivity and captivity he remembers here cannot be inferred from the
holy story, but from the context of this prophecy one may conclude that
this city of Gaza may have captured some Israelites during the battle,
whom it handed over as captives to the Edomites. For these heathen, who
dwelt round about, raged constantly with continual hatred against
Israel, in every way they could; they were in a continual jealousy,
missing no opportunity, no time, sparing no pains to harm Israel if they
could. So bitter were the godless Gentiles in their hearts against
Israel, the people of God. For Jerusalem was situated in the midst of
the Gentiles, all around it had the most harmful enemies. And of this
sin the Lord says that he will punish it sevenfold.

5\) D.: \"the prophet\" instead of: the HErr.

1696 L. XXV. 392-394. interpretation of Amos (1.), cap. 1, 6-11. W. VI,
24SV-2453. 1697

**Therefore, that they continued to capture the prisoners.**

As if to say: They have such a hostile and bitter heart against Israel
that they cannot satisfy their burning desire to avenge themselves.
Nothing is enough for them to take revenge on the people of God who have
the word of God. Satan cannot even stand the word of God; he opposes it
with all his might, and that is why he agitates the wicked against the
godly who have the word of God. So also nowadays our enemies are
exceedingly bitter, who dispute the word out of the impulse of Satan,
who, when he has taken away the word, easily draws all to himself 2c. So
bitter hearts had all these heathen against the people of God. 1)

V. 9. **For the sake of three and four vices of the city of Zor.**

Without a doubt the inhabitants of Zor acted in agreement with the
Philistines concerning the captivity of the children of Israel, of which
he said above. Those of Zor handed the Israelites over to the
Philistines to be led away, and the Philistines led them away or drove
them away. 2)

**And not thought of the covenant of the brothers. 3)**

As if to say, \"Those of Zor, even without being offended, have of their
own free will raged against my people and broken the brotherly covenant.
There is no doubt that he is speaking of the covenant made between
Solomon and Hiram king of Tyre. See 1 Kings 5:12.

**V. 11. For three and four vices of Edom \[I will not spare him;
because he has pursued his brother with the sword, and that**

1\) The last sentence is missing in D.

2\) Instead of this Anzen section D. has: \"Zor\" is the city which we
call Tyre. It indicates therefore that the Tyrians made an agreement
with the Philistines and handed over the Israelites to the Philistines
to lead them away.

3\) D. reads, instead of kratsrni in the manuscript, with the Vulgate:
kratrum, and then continues: For the king Hiram calls 1 Kings 9, 13.
Solomon \"my brother\". As if he wanted to say 2c.

**he killed their pregnant women, and always torn in his anger, and
holds his wrath forever\]. 4)**

In this passage, St. Jerome again did not get it right, and this is not
to be wondered at, for some man was not equal to such a heavy and
immense work of translation. For that he translates here: et violaverit
misericordiam ejus, is rendered quite unrhymed. But it should have been
translated: et perdidit viscera sua, 5) as if he wanted to say: They
should have loved each other intimately and ardently as brothers, the
highest connection and friendship should have existed between them, but
they corrupted each other. We can render in the German language the word
\[XXX\] 6) viscera, quite inappropriate. In Hebrew it is quite actually
spoken, and we render this peculiarity to some extent by the Latin word
viscera,. Frequently the apostles and evangelists have used this word
\[σ-ζα\^χ\^α\] also in the New Testament, as, Luc. 1, 78.: \"By the
hearty (viscera) mercy of our God.\" And Paul used it many times in his
epistles, Phil. 1, 8.: \"GOD is my witness, how I long for you all from
the bottom of my heart (in visceribus) in JEsu Christo.\" Likewise Cap.
2, 1.: \"heartfelt love (viscera) and mercy\" 2c. - Instead of: Tenuerit
ultra furorem suum, must be more correctly translated thus: He rages in
his anger without end, that is, to take revenge on his brother, in this
he knows no measure. For the Edomites came from Esau, who was the
brother of Jacob, who is otherwise called Israel, from whom the
Israelites \[come\]. Both are descended from the One Father Isaac. See
the first book of Moses \[Cap. 25, 21. ff.\] The same is that which
follows: \"And his wrath endureth forever,\" that is, the wrath of this
people vs.

4\) Vulgate: 8upsr tridus 86s1sridu8 Ddora st 8Upsr yuatuor non
sonvsrtarn surn; so yuod xsrssoutus sit in Zladio tratrsrn suurn, st
violavsrit missrisordiarn \[sus, st tsnusrit ultra kurorsin suum, st
indiAnationsra suam \[srvavsrit us\^us in ünsni.

5\) D.: visesra sjus vsl LIlos sjus.

6\) D. f: \"2N1\" should be set here instead of visssra, which is also
indicated by the Zwickau and Hall manuscripts.

1698 L- xxv, 3S4-3S\". Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi,
2423-2457. 1699

Israel is unforgiving. As this hatred began in Esau, it has never ceased
in the descendants.

**V. 12: I will send a fire to Theman.**

\"Theman\" was a grandson of Esau, and from him the whole country of the
Edomites was named after it. For so the scripture uses to call one and
the same country with different names, as one can see in the Psalms,
where Egyten is called with many names. This country \[XXXX = south\]
has its name from the south and was famous, because it had many
excellent and wise people. It is also mentioned in the book of Job, Cap.
6, 19.

**\[This shall consume the palaces at Bazra.\]**

\"Bazra\" is a magnificent and famous city of the Edomites.

**V. 13. For the sake of three and four vices of the children of
Ammon.**

In the explanation of this passage the exegetes differ quite
extraordinarily, since of the tearing of the pregnant women is said. It
is certain that the word \"tear\" is translated correctly from the
Hebrew, but under the \"pregnant women\" some want to understand
mountains, and for this they bring as proof what follows in this
context: \"so that they made their borders wider\", so that the opinion
would be: The Ammomter would have been seized in such a degree by the
desire to rule and to extend their borders that they would have torn
also the mountains and would have removed them from their place in order
to extend their borders. This would certainly have been a useless work,
so I hold that these are Jewish and quite arbitrary opinions. I
understand it quite simply, as the text reads in and of itself, either
of the tearing of the pregnant ones

or as a figurative speech, 1) as here the rural prophet is full of
images, and so the opinion would be: the Ammomter have devastated the
rich and glorious cities of Gilead. And this picture agrees also
exceedingly well with what follows of the widening of the borders. For
this peculiar vice was suffered by this people, that they made assaults
upon the borders of the Israelites. But if someone wants to understand
it also from torn pregnant women, I have nothing against it. But it is
inconsistent to attribute such a great cruelty to this people.

**V.** 14. **Within the walls of Rabbah.**

In every single country there was a peculiar and glorious city from
which the whole country got its name, as can be seen in all the sacred
histories.

**When one will call.**

Instead of in ululatu \[in the Vulgate) it should more correctly be read
vociferatione. For he speaks of the shouting or rejoicing of the
victors, not of those who are defeated, namely that the enemies would
rejoice at the destruction 2c.

V. 15 **Then their king (Melchom) will be led away captive with distant
princes.**

It is not a proper name, but an appellative. Therefore, it must be
translated like this: Their king will go into captivity. Now Milchon was
a god of the Ammonites. For as every country had its peculiar city from
which it received its name, so also every nation had its peculiar god,
as the Philistines had Dagon, the Ammonites Milchon, the Moabites
BaalPeor, as the histories testify 2c.

1\) D. f: for the powerful and rich cities.

1700 **L. XXV, 897-L99.** Interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 2, 1-4. **W.
VI, 2457-2460.** 1701

**The second chapter.**

**V. 1. \[Thus saith the LORD; For three and four vices of Moab will I
not spare them; because they have burned the bones of the king of Edom
to ashes\].**

1\) Here again there is nothing certain about history, which is
mentioned in the beginning of this chapter. The Jewish fables do not
please me, because they do not make us certain through Scripture, and
because there is no sacred history by which we can become certain. -I
think that this passage is to be understood figuratively, namely that
\"the bones\" do not refer to the bones of the body, but to the strong
and the rulers and the mighty, who are capable of using weapons and
waging war. For this is how the strong and mighty are used to be called
\"bones\" in the holy scriptures. Therefore the prophet punishes the
insatiable anger of the Moabites in the rage, because he remembers the
burning of the bones of the king of Edom (because it must not be read
incenderit \[as it is written in the Vulgate, but combusserit\].

We see in these scriptural passages the miraculous judgments of God,
which we think are coincidence or luck, namely, when some nations are
defeated by other nations in battle, while the armies of other nations
are defeated. All this happens through the judgment of God, and in
addition, the Almighty God also avenges the injustice done to the
Gentiles, so that we learn that God is the Lord of the whole world, that
everything happens according to His will, and that it is as the Apostle
Paul says \[Rom. 3:29\], that God is not only the God of the Jews, but
also of the Gentiles.

**V. 2. \[But I will send a fire into Moab, and it shall consume the
palaces of Kirioth; and Moab shall die in tumult, and in shouting, and
in sound of trumpets\]. 2)**

1\) D. begins like this: This prophecy of Moab is more correctly
connected to the first chapter. But here one asked 2c.

2\) Vulgate: Dt rnittum lZnom in st d6voravit asciss Oariotlr; st
mormtur in sonituin.

olanAorö tnb \"a6.

I think that Carioth should be read appellatively, namely: of the city.
3) - Instead of: in sonitu it should read more correctly: \"in the
tumult\". - And in the trumpet-hall\" \[that means in the rejoicing. -
After the prophecies against the Gentiles are finished, he now returns
to what he had undertaken and begins to prophesy against Judah. 5)

**Thus saith the LORD; For three and four vices will I not spare Judah;
because they have despised the law of the LORD, and have not kept his
statutes, and have been led astray by their lies, which their fathers
followed. 6)**

He punishes Judah because of the most noble of all vices, namely because
of idolatry, since they had left the right worship and the word of God;
for they always suffered from this ungodliness 7). For abominations and
idolatry inevitably follow when we fall away from the right word of God;
that this has happened we see both here and in all of Scripture. -
Instead of et mandata ejus, it should more correctly read: \"rights\".
What difference there is between commandments and rights we will say
elsewhere; here it is enough to distinguish that \"rights\" are
ceremonies concerning God, which can be changed according to the times.
8) Thus, in the second Psalm, it is foretold of Christ that He will
establish the law of God, or the counsel, or

3\) D.: eivitabis, which we have assumed, while the manuscript offers
vivitas. - Instead of Ourlotk, the manuscript reads Oiriotü. The Zwickau
manuscript has our Lesarst, dre of the Vulgate.

4\) D. t: adjacent.

5\) D. f: and here we will begin the first sermon.

6\) Vulgate: Uaeo dielt Dominu8: 8uper tridus seeleribus duda 6t supsr
ynatuor non oonv6rtam 6 um, 60 \<znod udjoosrit l6Mm Domini, st mandata
ejns non 6nstodi6rit; d666p6rnnt 6nirn 608 idola 8NU, P08t YNL6 adiorant
Mtr68 6orum.

7\) D.: the holy people

8\) The words: \"which, however - can\", are missing in D., are also in
the manuscript only in the margin, but provided with insertion marks. In
the Zwickau manuscript: Hnod tompor6 potost mutari swas can be changed
with the time\^.

1702 L. XXV, 3S9-401. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2460-2463.
1703

he will preach the decree of God; he will preach a far different council
of God than those in the Old Testament, namely, he is the eternal Son of
the Father, he will rule, he will be the king of the whole world, he
will condemn all that there is in human righteousness, also that which
is brought about from the law of God; but one must believe in him, one
must kiss him 2c., as the whole Psalm indicates, otherwise we would lose
the way to righteousness 2c. - Instead of: deceperunt eos idola sua it
should more correctly read: errare fecerunt eos mendacia^1^ ) sua
\[their lies have led them astray\]. He gives the reason why they must
be rejected, namely because they have followed the godless ways of their
godless fathers, the lies with which their fathers acted godlessly
against God, and which they godlessly continued to fortify. God wants us
to look only at His word, so that we do not follow or approve of what
our fathers followed or approved of, so that those will be disgraced who
today, contrary to the revealed word of God, claim the great number of
demonstrations and the length of time, seeing that the children are
punished who followed the ungodliness of their fathers, which the Lord
also forbade in the law, Deut. 18, 30: \"Keep my statutes, that ye do
not do after the abominable customs that were before you\" 2c.

V. 6. **For the sake of three and four vices of Israel.**

So far the prophet has made a digression and, as it were, given a
prelude to the prophecy, now he begins the real prophecy against Israel,
which he has undertaken. But the sum of the whole passage is this: The
prophet punishes the wickedness of Israel and condemns their tyranny and
unbelievable avarice, saying that they have sold the righteous for money
and the poor for a pair of shoes, that is, that they have not kept a
right court, and have by no means obeyed either equity or the law.

1\) mtznäneia set by us according to the Zwickau and Hall manuscripts,
instead of iäola in the Driginal and in D.

2\) \"the lies\" is missing from D.

They have not followed the right, but have only taken care of their
avarice; therefore, they have not taken care of the righteous. For in
this way all those must be judged who are without fear of God, that they
do not look at God\'s order and the right, but only want to satisfy
their own desire and are extraordinarily devoted to avarice 2c.

V. 7. **They tread the head of the poor in dung.**

Instead of: Qui conterunt super pulverem one reads more correctly: In
pulverem absorbent \[they devour into the dust (of the earth)). He uses
the word \"devour\" in order to emphasize their godless nature and their
presumption to bend the law, as if he wanted to say: They make the poor
nothing but dust, 3) they do not give justice to orphans, widows, or the
poor, who are already miserable enough and whom I want to be taken into
consideration, but they turn the law in favor of the noble and powerful,
as is also said in Hosea. The same is what follows:

**And hinder the way of the wretched.**

According to the Hebrew it means: the way of the miserable they bend or
turn. But \"the way\" means the affairs, the things, and it is the
opinion: they take so no consideration at all for the poor that they not
only neglect but also oppress those whose ways they should guard, whom
they should take in protection, whom they should let themselves be
commanded before all 2c.

**It sleeps son and father with a prostitute.**

So far he has punished the extraordinary tyranny and avarice of Israel,
now he also condemns their free fornication, of which he says that it
was so great that even father and son were not afraid to commit
fornication with the same maid; so much so that they had no regard for
respectability and chastity. And this could easily happen among the
Jewish people, since the maids were serfs, as well as the servants, whom
they abused for their fornication.

3\) D. †: and trample him down like dust,

1704 **XXV, 401-403.** interpretation of Amos (I.), Cap. 2, 7. 8. **W.
VI, 2463-2465.** 1705

**So that they may desecrate my holy name.**

That is the goal of all godlessness, that is what it all boils down to,
that the holy name of God is blasphemed and desecrated. The name of God
has been invoked over us, that is, we have become children of God by
grace, co-heirs with Christ; in short, whatever names God is called by,
we are also called by them when we believe; we are called righteous,
holy, wise, even gods. But God\'s name is blasphemed and profaned for
our sake and through us, if we do not walk worthily, if we walk and live
differently than befits Christians, if we give ourselves over to
ungodliness and impurity 2c.

**V. 8. And at all the altars they feast on the pledged garments.**

Here he accuses them again of avarice, saying of the unjust good and
robbery which they had extorted from the poor, namely, that they had
kept the pledged garments contrary to the law. For it was prescribed in
the law that no one who had received a pledge from his neighbor, who
owed him something, should keep the pledge during the night, if the one
from whom he had received the pledge was poor \[Deut. 24, 12. f.\]. But
like this law, all the others were very much despised.

**And drink wine in the house of their gods from the sweetened.**

For they used to extort unreasonable fines (mulctas \-\-- fines) from
the defendants. Behold the exceeding wickedness of the priests: It was
wholly forbidden to the priests, when they would go into the tabernacle,
to use wine, as the law says \[Deut. 10:9.\]. Here, however, he says
that they were not content to despise the law of God in such a way, but
that they also drank such wine, which they had obtained in the most
unjust way, namely, extorted quite unreasonably. Thus they took no
account of what was good and godly. Therefore, it is as if he meant to
say: they took unreasonable fines in order to buy wine for it, in order
to feast, and from the pledged clover, in order to drink the wine.

In the end, the people who had been forbidden by the Lord to keep even
overnight made themselves splendid cushions in order to be noble and to
let their desires run free. The words of the prophet are fiery and
extraordinarily violent. For he does not accuse them of simple
indulgence and splendor, but says that they live deliciously on unjust
goods and what they have robbed from the poor, forgetting all divine
laws.

Here the question arises, why the prophet punishes the desecration of
the temple, which Israel had, while he should rather have praised the
desecration of the godless temples, which were erected against God\'s
word. For Israel had no temple built according to God\'s word, but only
Bethel; but there was only the One Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem,
built according to God\'s word and order.

^1^) I answer: Nonetheless sinful-

1\) From here on until v. 9, D. has this explanation instead of the
following: Here it does not come into consideration what or where they
did it, but with what heart and in what attitude they did it. For
although it was the service of a false god, of which they had no
commandment from God, yet, because in that service their hearts were
sure and despised God, they despised the true God and not an idol.
Therefore, we read in the histories of the pagans that the greatest
punishments often followed the contempt of idols. Known is the defeat,
which the Gauls suffered under their leader Brenno at Delphi, because of
contempt of the deity. Known is the misfortune of Pyrrhus, which
followed the plundering of the temple of Juno in Italy. Such punishments
have befallen the godless people of God not because they despised the
idols, but because the contempt of the true God, whom they did not know
at all, was followed by the contempt of the other religions, which,
although they were blasphemous, were nevertheless considered by them to
be the service of the true God. Thus, the perjury of the pagans was
followed by certain punishments, not because it was not allowed to
misuse the name of Jupiter or Castor, but because they did not know the
name of the true God and used the name of the idols instead, which they
worshipped instead of the true God, they misused the name of the false
God for their own benefit, out of an ungodly neglect and contempt of all
religions. But those who have the knowledge of the true God are not only
free, but are even commanded to despise and condemn all idols and all
idolatrous worship. And this very condemnation of idols arises from the
fear and love of God and of the true religion, not from the contempt
from which perjury, neglect of pagan worship and the like arise among
the pagans. With

[1706 L. XXV, 403-406. interpretations on the prophets. W. vt,
24SS-2470. 1707]{.underline}

They did it in an ungodly way because they acted against their
conscience. For they thought that they had done this service to the true
God and not to the idols, and therefore the prophet judges them
according to their conscience. For although it was by no means a right
service of God, since it was done without the word of God, indeed,
against the word of God, and they did not serve the true God,
nevertheless, since their conscience punishes them, they are accused of
ungodliness. Therefore, the prophet says;

**In their gods home.**

As if to say: It\^was not the true GOD and not the right house of GOD,
and yet, because they thought that they were serving the true GOD and
did not do so, they acted ungodly. Therefore, their neglecting that
service is just as ungodly as if they had done so against the true God.
It is just as if it were said of our mass priests and monks: Because
these have vowed chastity and poverty and I do not know what other
things, and no one is more devoted to unchastity than they, and they are
the very richest, living most deliciously, therefore we can accuse them
of impiety, since they do not do enough with their vows, which, since
they cannot fulfill them, are impious and against God; but because they
want to be regarded as keeping them, and yet do not keep them, they are
impious 2c.

Therefore, the prophet rightly condemns the desecration even of a
condemned temple in which idolatrous services forbidden by God were
performed. Not as if he wanted a temple built against God\'s will to be
worshipped sacredly and ungodly sacrifices to be performed, but because
he does not want both the temple and the ungodly services to be despised
out of a\" godless carelessness and certainty of heart, with which they
did not despise both those ungodly things and the true God. Thus, today
we must despise and condemn all sacrifices of the Mass, since we know
that there is only one sacrifice through which everything is
accomplished, namely Christ hanging on the cross for our sins. But a
papist sacristan, who does not have this knowledge, and yet abuses the
mass ungodly, that he desecrates it for the sake of profit and treats it
with special frivolity, sins precisely in that he does not treat the
ungodly work with greater reverence, because he does this out of a
special contempt for God and all religions.

**V. 9. Now I have destroyed the Amorite before them.**

The Lord reproaches them for the benefits they have received and thus
punishes them for their ingratitude, since they have not allowed
themselves to be moved by such great and innumerable benefits to love
God, to follow the word of Him of whom they have always known that He is
their protector and Father, who had made them conquerors of all their
enemies through glorious victories, as if He wanted to say: \"Of course,
this is the thanks you give me.

**I destroyed its fruit above and its root below. 1)**

That is, I have utterly destroyed him, both great and small. For the
Amorites are so utterly destroyed and cut off by the root that not one
is left.

**V. 12. So you give wine to the Nazarenes to drink.**

It was not enough that you acted ungodly against my law and drank wine
in the temple, but you also gave others cause to sin against the law,
namely, by giving wine to the Nazarites to drink, which the law forbids,
Deut. 6:3. 2)

**V. 13. Behold, I will make it strange among you.**

This is a Hebrew figure of speech, as if he wanted to say: As a wagon
full of sheaves groans, so I will also see to it that you groan under
the wagons of the Assyrians, that is, oppressed by excessive burden and
work you shall groan, shall be oppressed again, while you are now proud
and puffed up. And it is that he says subter \[\"under\"), which we
cannot render suitably in Latin.

1\) In the original and also in D., this keyword is negligently
indicated: Oontrivi \"jus ruäiesna ässuxer. Instead of ätzsupar, kubier
is to be read.

S\) D. f: And this is also a reason why he disapproves of their actions,
namely that while they themselves despise religion out of an ungodly
certainty, they also lead the others by their example to a similar
contempt, so that they despise God and all religions by this contempt of
the vain worship and the ungodly religion par excellence.

1708 L. XXV. 4W-E Interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 2, 14. 3, 1. W. VI.
L470-S474. 1709

**V. 14. That he who is swift shall not escape.**

He takes away all protection, and threatens that he will destroy
everything by which they promise themselves salvation and escape, all
strength and effort to escape. It is a Hebrew way of speaking, since he
says (in the Vulgate): Peribit fuga (the escape shall perish), which
David also used in the 142nd Psalm, v. 5 (Vulgate): \"The escape has
perished from me\", that is, I do not see where I can escape, all hope
of escape is lost, I must perish 2c. So here the Lord threatens the
same, as if he wanted to say: I will surround you with such a great
power of enemies, and by the strength in

derer 1) I will instill fear in you so that you will not be able to
escape. The mightiest leaders of the armies will flee because they
despair and have no confidence in your affairs. So there will be no help
for you: the warriors, the leaders, the archers, the horsemen will all
be deprived of the hope of victory 2c. This is the end of the first
sermon in this prophet, because the prophets did not prophesy everything
immediately; 2) now another sermon follows.

1\) In the editions is so interpungirt: st viribus . aliorum, immittam
ete. We think that the comma should be deleted. So has the old
translator.

2\) The words: \"for - prophesied\" are missing in D.

**The third chapter.**

The short epitome and the occasion for this chapter or the following
sermon is this: 3) Many were annoyed by the previous sermon of the
prophet, and accused the prophet of foolishness, since he had not been
afraid to condemn all at the same time and to accuse of godlessness,
while the king was good and the greater part of the people was godly.
And so the king\'s good fortune gave them an opportunity to resist the
prophet. Therefore, the prophet is forced to start again and to continue
eagerly in condemning them, namely, that their hypocrisy would not be
valid, which they had used as a pretext for their godlessness. And he
begins like this:

**V. 1. Hear what the LORD speaks to you, O children of Israel 2c.**

3\) Instead of the following two sentences, D. offers: The Jews, angered
by the previous sermon of the prophet, accused him of foolishness, that
he had not shied away from condemning such a blessed king and the in
religion fo zealous. People to condemn. For they thought that the
happiness of the king was the strongest evidence with which they could
refute the prophet, because they thought that God would not give success
if the king was as godless as the prophet wanted him to be. Therefore
2c.

He himself gives the reason for this sermon as if he wanted to say:
\"After all, the Lord may have chosen you as his people; after all, you
may be famous in the whole world, ennobled by God\'s manifold works and
good deeds towards you; after all, he may not have done this to any
other people. But for this reason you are not righteous, because you are
transgressors of the divine law, yet you are well pleased because of
your innocence: but this I attack and condemn. This is how the divine
majesty always deals with us, that if we want to be good and holy, we
are ungodly before God. He does not want sinners who 4) do not want to
recognize their sin, but, puffed up, imagine a special holiness;
therefore they are rejected. But even great sinners who recognize their
error and do not cover their ungodliness with any hypocrisy, but ask for
mercy, receive it and the Lord accepts them, since Christ did not come
to call the righteous to repentance, but sinners \[Matth. 9, 13\]. We
see this also here.

4\) We have assumed here with D., instead of quia in the manuscript.

1710 L. xxv. 408-410. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi. 2474-2477.
1714

**V. 2. I will also punish you in all your iniquities.**

As if to say, \"You think I should spare you because you are my people,
but I will chasten you more, that you may know me and learn to trust in
me. So he also chastens his saints whom he loves. This is what Ezekiel
Cap. 9, 6. says: \"Faheth unto my sanctuary.\" And 1 Petr. 4, 17: \"It
is time for judgment to begin against the house of God. But if it be
first upon us, what end shall it be to them that believe not the gospel
of God?\" For thus the young dog receives blows, that the wolfhound may
be afraid. He punishes his children so that the wicked who do not repent
are beaten the harder, so that he rages against them the more fiercely
2c.

**V. 3. Even if two walk together, are they one with each other?**

Jerome passes by this passage undaunted; he cannot determine anything
about the meaning. For the word, which stands here in the Hebrew, has
various meanings: they know, they agree, also: they have come together.
Some have understood this of the king of the Assyrians and of God, for
God wanted to send the king of the Assyrians against Israel. To me, the
text seems to be quite proverbial, so that the opinion is: Two cannot
walk with each other if they are not in harmony, if they do not agree
with each other. The application of the proverb is this: these two are
God and the people; as if the Lord wanted to say: Already from this you
can see that I am against you, that I am not on your side, since we do
not walk on the same path, as it should be. I am not one with you, and
yet you want to escape unpunished. You are godless and transgressors of
the law, yet you plead your innocence. Therefore I, who am righteous,
will not spare your unrighteousness; I will not cease to strike you
until you have become one with me, which is not the case now, since you
are following a way that is different from mine.

**V. 4. Does a lion roar in the forest when it has no prey?**

This is the same as the previous passage, and this is the meaning of the
saying, as if the Lord wanted to say: When a lion is not satiated, he
roars over the prey he has obtained, which he wants to devour and
satisfy his hunger with. So I would desist from roaring against you, 1)
I would not be against you if you were not wicked and ungodly, if you
did not give me cause to rage against you. A similar way of speaking is
in the book of Job, Cap. 6, 5: \"The deer does not cry out when it has
grass.\" And to this also belongs everything that follows. 2)

**V. 5. Does a bird also fall into the rope?**

As if he wanted to say: Because I am the bailiff, the nets are stretched
out; I threaten you. Misfortune. Because you do not flee the ropes,
because you continue to act ungodly, you will be caught. You will not be
able to escape my judgment. The same is what follows:

**Do you also pick up the rope?**

He looks at the intention of the birdcatcher, not at the work itself. 3)
For the fowler can be deceived that he does not catch anything, but in
the intention and in the opinion he spreads his net that he wants to
catch. Thus, says the Lord, I do not threaten you with disaster in vain;
I will catch you through the king of the Assyrians.

**V. 6: Do they also blow the trumpet in a city?**

It is clearer if instead of: Si clanget tuba in civitate so translated,
\"Do they also blow the trumpet?\" for the Latin interpreter has
obscured the sense, translating it in the form of a condition. It must
all be related to the preaching of the prophet, through

1\) D. t: through my prophets

2\) I.e., and although the images are different, they signify the same
thing. For he indicates why he threatens such terrible things, why he
teaches such hateful things, namely because God wants him to say this,
and because through their sins they give the cause that nothing milder
can be said. Nothing milder can be said.

3\) D. f: or the output.

1712 **L. XXV, 410-412. interpretation of Amos (1.), cap. 3, 6-11. W.
VI. 2477 -2480.** 1713

which he reminds them of the captivity to come if they do not repent, as
if to say, \"When the trumpet sounds, either the enemy is there or there
is a conflagration in the city; do not doubt that disaster will also
befall you, for I am not punishing you in vain.

**Is there also a calamity in the city that the Lord does not do?**

He takes his proof from the righteousness of God, just like Paul in his
letter to the Romans Cap. 9, 14: \"Is God unrighteous? 1) as if to say,
\"You should fear and be afraid, but you continue to sin against me.

**V. 7 For the Lord does nothing, but reveals his secret to the
prophets, his servants.**

That is, when something is going to happen, when a calamity is about to
befall you, the Lord always makes it known through his prophets, whom he
sends to foretell the calamity to come. Therefore, do not doubt that a
mighty persecution awaits you, since I am now sent 2c. This is what I
said at the beginning of this prophet, that always before a great change
of things took place, the prophets were sent beforehand to remind the
people of the counsel of the Lord.

**V. 8. The lion roars. Who should not be afraid?**

He goes on to confirm his earlier sermon against the godless works
saints, the hypocrites, who persuaded themselves that they were
extraordinarily holy, as we said at the beginning of this chapter.
Therefore, defying their privilege, they thought either the prophet was
lying or he was nonsensical. Therefore, he again reminds them of the
wrath and anger of the Lord, that it will happen 2) that they will
perish by the judgment of God, if they do not repent.

1\) Both the Erlangen and Weimar editions offer: nuva justitia azruä
ckmim. The Wittenberg and the Jena have msustitia; the Vulgate has:
iniquitas.

2\) Weimarsche: kurs instead of: toi-s; a misprint.

The Lord is roaring against them and has a disaster in store for them;
they are threatened with imprisonment 2c.

**V. 9. Proclaim in the palaces of Ashdod.**

He compares the surrounding Gentiles with the people of God, so that
they may be dismayed and ashamed of their godless nature, in which, as
they see, they also surpass the Gentiles, as if the prophet wanted to
say: Behold, you Gentiles who live all around, gather yourselves 3) to
us, examine whether we can also be compared to you. This people, which
wants to be God\'s people, surpasses you in godlessness, who do not
serve the true God. In this way almost all prophets justify the Gentiles
in comparison to the godless Israel. Thus Ezekiel Cap. 16, 48: \"Sodom,
your sister, with her daughters, has not done as you and your daughters
have done\" 2c. The same is found in Jeremiah \[Cap. 23, 14\].

**Gather on the mountains of Samaria.**

Here he clearly indicates the godlessness of Israel, of which he also
said above. There is, he says, in this kingdom no administration of
justice, no worldly regiment; there is no end to avarice and
ostentation. The same punishes Isaiah Cap. 2, 7. and says: \"Their land
is full of silver and gold, and there is no end to their treasures\" 2c.
Almost all prophets condemn this vice of this people, 4) the godless
tyranny of the princes.

**V. 10. They do not respect any right.**

That is, so much is lacking in them that they should be good and godly,
that they have no common sense either; they are senseless like
unreasoning cattle.

**V. 11. They will besiege this land all around.**

The opinion is: You rob the poor of their possessions, there is no
measure in stinginess, but the judgment of God awaits you in turn. You

3\) Instead of oonZreZenaini in the editions, eonArsZnnaini should
probably be read with the Vulgate. Likewise in the following keyword,
where only the Wittenberg has correctly eonZrsZamini.

4\) D. f: seiliest,

1714 L. XXV, 412-414. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2480-2488.
1715

will be taken away captive, all your goods and your jewelry will be
taken away from you, your kingdom and your priesthood. - \"Thy power.\"
This word is often taken in Scripture for the kingdom, as it must be
taken here and in many Psalms.

**V. 12: As a shepherd snatches two knees or the lobe of an ear from the
lion\'s mouth.**

God is not angry in a human way, since people are so bitter against
those they hate that they would rather have them completely exterminated
than to keep them alive for only one hour; and this anger is greatest in
those who persecute the Word. This anger is described by Isaiah. God is
angry and smites however much he rages, so that a remnant remains
unharmed. We see the same thing here. He threatens them with terrible
captivity, desolation and the plundering of all things; the Lord will
overtake them through the king of the Assyrians, so that it seems as if
all should be taken away: yet a remnant should remain, so that all do
not perish completely. The prophet certainly uses a harsh and horrible
simile by which he wanted to indicate the misery of the captivity. But
since this prophet is a shepherd and a farmer, he takes the parables
from the things he knows best, as from the flocks of sheep, cows 2c.
Therefore, the meaning of the parable is: \"Just as a leg or the lobe of
a sheep snatched from the lion\'s mouth cannot be compared, indeed is
nothing compared to the rest of the whole consumed body, so also the
Assyrian king will consume you, but nevertheless I will see to it that a
few remain intact, so that the Israelites do not perish completely. As
the prophet Isaiah is finer than this farmer of Thekoa, so he also used
a more sweet simile on the very same opinion, Cap. 65, 8.: \"As one
findeth must in a bunch of grapes, and saith, Spoil it not, for there is
a blessing in it: so will I do for my servants\' sakes, that I spoil it
not all.\" The prophets are full of such passages.

**And have in the corner a bed and at Damascus a sponde (In plaga
lectuli \[et in Damasci grabato\]).**

Here also even the Jews are not unanimous about this word. I translate
it thus: In the corner of the bed and in the sponde at Damascus. But the
meaning must be guessed. I hold completely that it is to be referred
to 1) the tribe Juda. He calls the kingdom of Israel a bed. In this bed,
that is, in this peaceful and excellent kingdom, he says, they do as
they please. This is also how I understand the speech at Damascus about
the kingdom. So it is the opinion of the prophet: only one corner of the
bed will be preserved, the whole remaining part will perish, only a part
of the people, and that the smallest, shall be preserved, while all the
others have perished; only a few remnants will remain both in Damascus
and in Samaria. For it is known from the sacred histories that this
happened. For after the Israelites were destroyed by the Assyrian army,
there remained very few who joined Judah. These had godliness at heart;
and just as not all who belonged to Israel sinned, so not all were led
away and perished. Now this is my opinion; because it agrees with
history, therefore it pleases me.

**V. 13 Hear and testify in the house of Jacob.**

He interprets the previous saying as if he wanted to say: according to
their opinion, they have arranged an excellent service, they have a fat
and rich priesthood in

1\) Instead of the following to \"Because it happened this way\" D. has:
the services, so that it is a similar picture as in Isaiah, Cap. 57, 7.
\"Bed\" and \"Sponde\" he calls the altars and the groves in which the
adulterers lay, that is, practiced idolatry. As if he wanted to say:
they serve the idols in Damascus and in the corners of the bed, that is,
in Dan or Bethel. The meaning of this last part is therefore: the
children of Israel, who dwell in Samaria and fornicate with idols, will
suffer the punishments of their ungodliness. And yet, as a shepherd
snatches a knee or the lobe of an ear from the lion that is torn, so
some few will remain. Because that it happened in such a way 2c.

1716 **L. XXV, 414-417.** interpretation of Amos (1.), cap. 4, 1. 2.
**W. VI, 2483-2486.** 1717

Bethel, they let their appetites run wild, they live most deliciously,
they have houses in which they spend the winter and those in which they
live during the summer, built most deliciously; they are safe and quiet,
but the time will come when I will visit the priesthood, the temple and
the sacrifices, \"and then the priests and the pens

everything will come to naught\". 1) Thus the prophets describe
everywhere the wealth of the false prophets and the godless priests. The
latter must have abundance of all things; meanwhile the true prophets
are not honored; the latter suffer sorrow and hunger, the latter have
nothing.

1\) D. omits the German; for it: and there will be priest and temple at
the same time.

**The fourth chapter.**

2\) He addresses the ungodly wives of the wicked and calls them \"fat
cows\". For this generation is far too weak to have any use for
prosperity, since they are wont to afflict the hearts of the wise. To
this opinion also speaks Isaiah Cap. 3, 16: \"Therefore the daughters of
Zion are proud, and walk with their necks lifted up, and with their
faces made up\" 2c. So he speaks also here of the wives of the high
priests and the princes, to whom the goods of the poor become a prey.

V. 1. **You fat cows.**

That is, you rich and powerful women 3) among the people, who are a
cause of ungodliness to your husbands. Your avarice is insatiable; there
is no measure of your indulgence and your ostentation. (For it is
implanted in this generation by nature that they are devoted to these
things unless there is godliness). And this is that he adds: 4)

**And speak to your masters.**

\[This is\] to your men. 5)

2\) Instead of this whole paragraph, D.: Some take the \"fat cows\" for
the wives of the rich, who abuse the present fortune for indulgence, as
Is. 3, 16. is said: \"Therefore, that the daughters of Zion are proud,
and walk with erect neck, with made-up faces\" 2c., they think that the
prophet is also speaking here of the wives of the high priests, the
priests and the princes, but I prefer to understand it of the idolaters,
to whom false religion was for profit.

3\) D. omits \"women\" and says: who give you a cause to the rest of the
people 2c.

4\) From the beginning of the parenthesis until here, D.

Instead, D.: This is to those who protect your ungodly worship and make
you rich.

**Let\'s get drunk.**

Instead of ut bibamus^6^ ) it should more correctly read: let us feast,
and let us live deliciously and gloriously. Because you seek this one
thing, therefore the Lord has sworn by himself 7) or by his holiness
that he will bring the Assyrian king upon you, to whom you will become a
prey, who will slaughter you, the fat cows.

**V. 2. that you will be brought out with fishing rods. 8)**

Again, these are parables of the beast. As if he wanted to say: As we
are used to carry slaughtered meat on a spit or on a stick, so also this
one will take you away in miserable captivity.

**And your descendants.**

Instead of et reliquias vestras, it should more correctly read: your
remaining, your last, that is, your house, your sons and daughters, with
whom you now lead such a tender life, these the king of the Afsyrians
will also take away.

**Mt Fishhäklein.**

In ollis ferventibus \[Vulg.: in boiling pots\] or in a fish cel they
will perish miserably with you in captivity.

6\) In the Vulgate: stdidswus.

7 ) Thus, according to the Zwickau manuscript, is to be translated per
\"anstuin.

8\) In the text: Hui\^us in sontis vos portabit \[who will carry you
away on polesU in the Vulgate: st Isvndunt vos in sontis.

1718 L. xxv, 417-419. interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2486-2488.
1719

**V. 3. and shall go out to the gaps, every one before him, and be cast
away to Harmon.**

You will not go out on the right road, but through the gaps as you are
able. For so it will happen that you, who now dwell safely in
well-fortified cities, will flee when the Assyrian comes, and after the
walls and fortifications are destroyed, he will push you out of the city
through those gaps. He will have no regard for your dignity, but as you
fall into his hands, so he will let you go out and drive you forward.
\"He will drive you before him as the shepherd drives the cows.\" -
\"Harmon,\" 1) the commentators mean, is a high mountain, or Armenia,
and I know not what is to be indicated by this. But this is nothing, and
we do not concern ourselves with it. We are satisfied with the simple
history. Therefore, as he named the city of Kir above in the first
chapter, v. 5. so here let us understand a place or region in Assyria
where the captive Israelites were brought. For as I said above, just as
the Israelites were not taken away to Syria, neither were they taken to
Armenia, but to Media and Persia.

**V. 4. Yes, come to Bethel, and cast out sin.**

These two places, Gilgal and Bethel, are famous and infamous, because
they wanted to be like the priesthood of Judah in these places. They
performed a very high service in these places, but still against God\'s
word. Therefore, this passage is in a mocking way a kind of bitter and
sharp concession, as if he wanted to say: I condemn this godless worship
of yours, I always forbid you not to deviate from the worship that is
established by my word, but you confidently despise me and continue to
act godlessly. Go on, go on, as if you had not been ungodly enough
before. \"Yes, yes, go on.\" So it goes with all the ungodly, that they,

1\) Instead of the following to the end of the paragraph D. has: This is
perhaps the mountain Amanus, beyond which the people are led away to
Assyria.

if they want to be righteous, if they think they are acting well, they
will sin all the more grievously in God\'s judgment.

**And bring your sacrifices of the morning.**

This also belongs to the mocking speech. This prophet had great
audacity, since he was not afraid to condemn and reject the highest and
seemingly best works done to the true God.

**And your tithes of the third day.**

2\) Here I follow the opinion of Lyra, as if the prophet wanted to say:
You establish a service, you seek to do like Judah, which has the law of
God that it should appear before the Lord three times a year, as the law
prescribes. You also pursue the same, and when you come together, you
preach your ungodly nature and make much of it. Because you act without
God\'s word and without faith, these are your inventions. Therefore, you
mock God, and God mocks you. Therefore, nothing is valid before God but
what He Himself has established.

V. 5. **and burn incense from the leaven for the sacrifice of
thanksgiving.**

\[Instead of sacrificate it means\] according to the Hebrew: set on
fire. There were many kinds of sacrifices: Burnt offerings, thank
offerings, likewise vow offerings and voluntary offerings offered in
thanksgiving. Therefore, it would have been more correctly translated
here (instead of laudem in the Vulgate): Lobopfer. Because such
sacrifices happened for certain good deeds to the thanksgiving, as is to
be read in Moses. So he took this passage from Moses, as if he wanted to
say: Well, light your sacrifice, you excellent people, namely you
priests, who use leaven for sacrifice, from which, as the law wants, one
must be extremely careful. Or (so that it would be a mocking speech) he
rebukes here again the godless hypocrisy, which they did with the law,
since everything was done against the law. It

2\) Instead of this passage, D.: Instead of tribus dus is more correctly
translated thus: Bring your tithes\" of the third day. But these are
mocking concessions, as many such are also read in the other prophets.

1720 **L. XXV, 419-421.** interpretation of Amos (1.), cap. 4, 511 .
**W. VI. 2488-2492.** 4721

was A place prescribed by GOD where He wanted to be worshipped. Leavened
bread was also used for the sacrifice of thanksgiving, Deut. 7, 13.

**And preach of voluntary sacrifice (Et vocate voluntarias
oblationes).**

The apostle Paul translated the word vocare everywhere by preach. So it
must be translated also in this place, as if the prophet wanted to say:
by these your sermons you invite the people to that your godless being
which you have caused. Voluntarias, that is voluntary. It is a legal
word taken from Moses, because under this name several sacrifices were
made in the law. So it is also said in the 119th Psalm, v. 108: \"Let
the willing sacrifice of my mouth be acceptable unto thee, O Lord.\"

**V. 6. Therefore I have also given you idle teeth (stuporem dentium) in
all your cities.**

As if he wanted to say: I cannot dissuade you from that godless nature,
I do nothing with plagues, however great and much they may be, therefore
I am finally forced to reject you completely. I have done nothing by
famine, nothing by pestilence, nothing by drought, nothing by failure of
the seeds, because always when you should have returned to me, since I
have beaten you in this intention, you have returned to that service of
yours, although it is an abomination to me. But here is a figurative
speech of the Hebrew language, which is quite far-fetched, which we
cannot reproduce with our words. But it is written in Hebrew like this:
I have given you purity or idleness of teeth, that is: long ago you had
nothing to eat, I had sent famine upon you, but you continue to sin. For
when the Jews were thus smitten by the Lord, they thought that the cause
was that they had neglected the service at Bethel, since it was the
Lord\'s intention that they, thus smitten, should recognize their error
and take refuge in him and obtain mercy. So we also suffer from the same
ungodliness: when the Lord is angry with us and gives us some

Whenever the Turk sends us misfortune, we celebrate field festivals and
say many masses, even though we provoke the Lord even more severely in
this way. The same thing happens every year when we have to fight with
the Turk, and that is why the Turk always has the upper hand over us.
And this is what I said above, that the wicked, since they meanwhile
think they are doing well, only sin the more grievously 2c.

**V. 7. a field was irrigated (Pars una compluta est).**

\[Pars\] means a field, because in Hebrew a field is called a part
(portio), because to each individual citizen his fields are allotted.

V. 8. **and two, three cities went to one city.**

In Hebrew it means: they wavered. It indicates the movement and swaying
of the thirsty people.

**V. 9. all that grew in your gardens 2c.**

Multitudinem, that is, the whole quantity of your fruits. You see the
same thing in Hosea.

**V. 10. I sent pestilence among you (Misi in vos mortem).**

Instead of mortem, it should more correctly read: pestilence. Where or
when this history happened, we do not know. - \"I caused your horses to
be led away captive.\" Instead of usque ad captivitatem, according to
the Hebrew it should read: into captivity.

**V.11. I turned back some of you, as God turned back Sodom and
Gomorrah.**

This can be read in the conjunctive as well as in the indicative. But it
is the opinion, which I have indicated above in the third chapter \[v.
12\], of the saved others. I have turned you back and afflicted you
miserably; I have led you away and trampled you underfoot, but still
some, very few remnants have been torn out, a very small part has been
preserved, so that Israel would not perish completely. For so much

1\) amdarvalia, which the old translator paraphrases very well: \"we
hold processions in which one rides around the corridor with crosses and
flags\".

1722 L. XXV. 421-424. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 24S2-24SS.
172\"

Even though I have smitten you in the most wretched way, you have not
returned to the one who smites you, that is, to me, the LORD your God.
But he uses a similitude according to his way: Just as a firebrand, and
a burning one at that, plucked out of the conflagration, cannot be
compared to a whole burnt Hanse, so your remnant is nothing compared to
the whole people 2c. This is also how the Lord deals with us when he
wants to justify us; he frightens and disgraces our consciences in such
a way that we think it has happened to us, as if we should already be
eternally damned. And yet there is still some hope left, so that we do
not completely despair. He snatches us out of the fire, as it were, as a
fire. Therefore these and similar passages are written both to terrify
and to comfort. They frighten those who have a hard neck and stubbornly
insist on their righteousness. They comfort those who humbly and
shatteredly recognize their error. Happy is he who understands this!

**V. 12 Therefore I will continue to do this to you, Israel.**

1\) Some want something to be omitted here (esse eclipsin), so that the
opinion is: I have done this to you so far, I will continue to do it
further. I do not like this opinion. For what should the Lord do further
to those who have already turned back before, like Sodom, and so much so
that hardly the very least remains, like the leg of a sheep torn out of
the mouth of a lion, or a firebrand torn out of a conflagration, have
been preserved? But my opinion is that he thus says: Israel, you think
you have a gracious God, whom you seek and call upon in Bethel against
the law of God; but look upon me, it is I who strike you, and therefore
you should return to me and prepare to meet me; but you do not do it.

1\) D. begins this passage thus: I like that something is left out here,
so that the opinion is: I have done this to you so far, and will
continue to do the same to you. Others would rather interpret it as if
he meant to say: Israel, you mean 2c.

**And meet your God (In occursum meum).**

Here again the interpreters diverge. The Septuagint\'s interpretation is
beautiful, but the grammar does not allow it. This passage, however,
belongs where many others in the prophets belong, like the one in
Ezekiel Cap. 13, 5: \"They do not stand before the gaps, nor make
themselves a barrier around the house of Israel, nor stand in battle in
the day of the LORD.\" Likewise Cap. 22:30: \"I sought among them if any
man would make himself a wall, and stand against the breach against me
for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none.\" And Isa.
64:7, \"There is none that calleth upon thy name, or riseth up to keep
thee.\" So here also is the same opinion, as if he wanted to say: With
the plagues with which you were struck, I wanted this, that you would
return to me, that you would meet me, anticipate the wrath, oppose me,
so that I would not continue to avenge; but you do completely the
opposite. Everything is connected with the foregoing, since he kept
repeating, \"You have not yet turned back to me.\"

**V. 13 For behold, it is he who makes the mountains.**

He cites the greatness of his power. What is it, he says, that you take
refuge in idols or in human help, while you should fear me, of whom you
know that I can create everything and make it perish. I am the creator
of all sublime things; the night, the day, the lust for life, everything
comes from me. Therefore, you are fools who think you can escape from my
hand, since I am so powerful that I have everything in my hands. When I
have seized someone, there is no one who could snatch him away from me.
Thus he opposes his omnipotence to their godless hardness. In the same
way also Isaiah Cap. 51, 15. f. speaks: \"I am the Lord, your God, who
moves the sea\" 2c.

**He who creates the wind (Creans ventum).**

I understand \[by \"wind\"\] the spirit of life or the breath, as if he
wanted to say: so much you cannot escape from my hands, if I want to
take revenge on you, that you also have your spirit of life from me. If
I take it from you, you will not be able to live for a moment.

1724 \" XXV, 424-426. interpretation dG Amos (1.), cap. 4, 13. 5, 1. 2.
W. VI, 249S-2499. 1725

**And show the man what he should speak (Eloquium suum).**

I interpret it like this: Who gives to men that they may speak. For the
divine majesty is so close to us that it also gives us the words that we
are to speak. For the Hebrew word actually signifies this. But when the
Scripture speaks of the speech of God or the word of God, it uses the
word XXX 2) or XXX.

**He makes the dawn and the darkness.**

That is, you do not yet fear the Lord, who can also take away from you
the day of which you cannot do without.

1\) D. here incorrectly inserts the Hebrew word \^21.

2\) In the original: amra; in D.:

**He steps out of the heights of the earth.**

Everything that is great and exalted on earth is subject to him. Besides
the literal sense, it will not be inadmissible to play here also with
secret interpretations: The LORD forms the mountains, that is, all
power, all dominion, comes from him; when he wills, it ceases, he
subdues it again, as he says, \"He treadeth upon the high places of the
earth.\" Likewise he makes the dawn and the day \[that is, good times\],
likewise the darkness, that is, evil 3) times. When he wills it, our
things go on happily; again, when he wills it, everything is unhappy and
is disturbed 2c.

3\) Here we have assumed instead of doua: umla. It seems to us here that
what we have inserted in parenthesis has been omitted by a printing
error, or rather doua tsiupora has been put in the second place, instead
of mala tempora. In our original: item undila koo est: mala tempora.

**The fifth chapter.**

^4^) As I said above at the beginning of the third chapter, the prophets
did not finish these books, which contain prophecies or sermons, in one
year, just as they did not immediately prophesy everything in one year;
so also here another sermon begins, which is held in another year. But
it has the same opinion as the previous ones, and it all comes to the
same thing, but in each individual sermon he uses different words and
different ways of speaking. For in general these books of the prophets
are nothing else than sermons.

**V. 1. 2. Hear this word, you of the house of Israel, to whom I must
make this lamentation: The virgin of Israel is fallen, that she shall
not rise again.**

4\) Instead of this section, D. has: As I said above that the speeches
of the prophets are not continuous, but that the individual chapters are
individual sermons, which are given at different times, so also here is
a new sermon, although it is of the same opinion as the previous ones,
and everything goes to the same thing, only that he uses other words and
other figures of speech.

That he says: I raise above you (levo \[XXX\] super vos), is a common
Hebrew way of speaking in all prophets. Since they call the word of the
Lord a burden, the prophets announce a future evil that shall afflict
the people. Therefore they gave the word the name \"burden\", since the
prophets were burdensome and hateful and troublesome, since they
proclaimed nothing but a burden, desolation of the land, wrath and
threat of God, just as Paul also says (and with him all proclaimers of
the word) \[Rom. 1, 18.\]: \"God\'s wrath from heaven is revealed
against all ungodly beings\" 2c. This sermon, which in your opinion is
hard and heavy, does not want the flesh to suffer, but trusts in its
righteousness and thinks that it does not deserve the punishment. But
the prophets threaten a temporal evil, so that we do not have to suffer
the eternal one, if we do not repent. 5) The same word is also in this
passage, where he says: levo super vos, \"I will be over

5\) This sentence is missing in D.

4726 k. XXV, 426-428. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2499-2502.
1727

you lnden\". In Latin, we cannot well imitate this Hebrew way of
speaking.

**The virgin Israel has fallen.**

Israel was betrothed to God alone because of the word of God and the
faith in the word by which their souls were kept chaste. But he says
that she \[\"the virgin Israel\"\] has fallen, or will fall, and shall
be laid waste by the king of the Assyrians. Thus the prophet envisions
the calamity that was to happen, as if it were already happening or had
happened. This is the way of the prophets. But he does not speak of
virginity, as the interpreters are fooling at this point, and Jerome
with them.

**That she will not get up again.**

This is what also Hosea Cap. 1, 6. prophesied: \"I will no longer have
mercy on the house of Israel, but I will cast them away.\" For they are
so desolate and scattered that they have never been restored to their
kingdom, as the sacred histories indicate.

**She is knocked to the ground and there is no one to help her up.**

It will lie desolate and abandoned, while a few remnants will remain,
but these remnants will not be comparable to those that will be
discarded and perish; barely the tenth part will remain, as is evident
from the following.

**V. 3. the city where a thousand go out 2c.**

This is what he said above about the remnant to be saved, like a knee
torn out of the lion\'s mouth and like a firebrand torn out of a
conflagration. Here he speaks clearly, without image. As if he wanted to
say: They will be devastated in the most miserable way, but still very
few remains will be left.

**V. 4. Seek me.**

Now the Lord begins to admonish and warn in a most friendly way, as if
he wanted to say: Seek me, me. I am the one who strikes you, as he said
above; I can also heal you.

Why do you deun run to your ungodly worship in Bethel? 1) Come back to
me. Thus the Lord always has his eye on Bethel, as he also immediately
adds. \"Seek the LORD\" is not in seeking in outward works, or in
outward hypocrisy, but, as it is said in the Psalm \[Ps. 119, 2. 10.\],
2) with all the heart he must be sought; he requires the heart, not the
outward rending of garments, as also Joel, Cap. 2, 13, says: \"Rend your
hearts\" 2c. So also says Isaiah Cap. 21, 12. \[Vulg.\], \"If ye seek
the Lord, seek him; be converted, and come.\"

**This is how you will live.**

It is a Hebrew expression that we render in Latin somewhat like this: it
will be well with you (bene habebitis). This expression is frequent in
Scripture, as Ps. 142, 6: \"My portion in the land of the living.\" Thus
Isa. 38, 11. in the song of Hezekiah: \"I said: Now I no longer have to
see the Lord in the land of the living,\" that is, in the land where
everything is happy and everything is well.

**V. 5. Do not seek Bethel, and do not come to Gilgal, and do not go to
Beersheba.**

The same foolishness and the same godless nature was with this people as
with ours, who erected a temple or an altar in honor of the saints, if
they had been in a place or had done something. Quite the same
nonsensical procedure was also with the Jews. In Bethel Jacob had been,
in Gilgal 3) they had been circumcised, in Berseba Abraham had stayed.
Therefore they chose these places before others as holy, and set up any
place of worship.

1\) From here to the following \"Bethel\" is missing in D., probably by
mistake.

2\) From here to \"Joel 2, 13.\" D. has instead of the following: seek
with all their heart, that they earnestly grieve over the sin they have
committed and in hope of divine mercy turn to him who smites them, ask
him for forgiveness, desire mercy and desist from finding it. The
hypocrites seek in a different way, for they have a blind and
unrepentant heart, they do not see their sins, therefore they do not
call upon God seriously, and seek Him only in appearance with fasting,
tearing of clothes 2c. But Joel 2, 13. 2c.

3\) Instead of Oilssä in the issues is to be read after Jos. 5, 7.
OUZuI.

1728 **L. XXV. 429-431.** interpretation of Amos **(I.),** Cap. 5, 5-9.
**W. VI, 2502-2505.** 1729

service. But the Lord wanted us to follow not the deeds but the faith of
the saints, for he always inculcates this in the law: Keep what I
command you, as if to say: not what I have done with the saints. And
since the holy prophets taught such things, they were considered
heretics and, as it were, godless people who prevented the service of
God. 1) But the prophets went about bringing Israel completely and badly
back from works alone to the word, which we also should do without
delay; but as then the prophets were despised and killed as blasphemers,
so the same thing happens to us today 2c.

**Bethel will become BethAven (Bethel erit inutilis).**

Here is the word \[H, of which I said above. Here the prophet has used
it in its right and proper meaning, as also in the 90th Psalm, v. 10.:
\"And if it has been delicious, it has been toil and labor.\" So here:
\"Bethel shall become Aven,\" that is, as ye have wrought ungodly
righteousness in Bethel, whereof ye have had trouble and travail, so
shall the Lord do the same unto you, namely, make Bethel BethAven, that
is, \"ye shall have heartache and sorrow therefrom.\" This Bethel will
be the cause of very great misfortune for you.

**V. 6. in the house of Joseph.**

The kingdom of Israel is elsewhere in the prophets called the house of
Joseph, Samaria, (the house of) Israel, Mount Ephraim, the house of
Ephraim 2c.

**V. 7 You who turn justice into wormwood.**

Scripture always connects these two words. But this passage is taken
from Genesis, Deut. 29:18: \"Lest there be a root among you that beareth
gall and wormwood.\" From this passage also the author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, Cap.

1\) D. 1\". Just as we are condemned today because we do not approve of
the self-chosen services and insist on the works of the profession. But
the prophet deals with it 2c.

12, 15, likewise the Acts of the Apostles, Cap. 8, 23, repeats this
expression. But the opinion is: You, secure in your righteousness,
despise God, whom you should fear, 2) and so you turn what is otherwise
sweetest into bitter bile for yourselves and others 2c.

V. 8. the **mother hen** (Arcturum).

At this point the Hebrews bring up various things, which are uncertain,
therefore we also leave this aside. The prophet, however, intends, as
above, to oppose the power of God to the godless despisers, as also
indicated by what follows. 3)

**Who makes the dark night out of the day.**

As if to say, \"The gods you seek in Bethel and Gilgal and Beersheba
will not help you. In vain do you take refuge in them, as if you could
obtain help from them and call upon them for help. I am the Lord and the
Creator of all things, 4) come to me and you will live.

**Who calls to the water in the sea. 5)**

This is what is said in the Psalm \[Ps. 147, 8.\]: \"He who covers the
sky with clouds, and gives rain on earth.\" For he causes clouds to rise
from the sea, 6) when he wants to give rain, as can be seen in the
history of Elijah 2c.

V. 9. **who causes a disturbance on the strong, and brings a disturbance
on the strong city. 7)**

This is translated quite unrhymed. In Hebrew, however, it reads like
this: the one who disturbs

2\) Instead of the following, D.: Moreover, you have no just government,
but abuse your power to oppress the good. For he indicates both: the
church and the secular regime are mismanaged 2c.

3\) D. f: What the Latin translated by \^retururu, others translate by
the Pleiades s \"the mother hen\"), and this I like better.

4\) D. I: I who create the change of times, I who bring forth the
springs and rivers from the sea;

5\) This entire section is missing from D.

6\) Instead of: ässeeuaere we have assumed aseeuäere with the Hallic
manuscript.

7\) Vulgate: Hui sukriäet vastitateur super rokusturu, st äepoxulatiouem
super potentem altert.

55

[1730 L. XXV. 431-434. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI.
2605-2508. 1731]{.underline}

makes strong \[XXXXX). It is the same word that is found in the 39th
Psalm, v. 14: \"That I may rest \[XXXXXX\] before I go, and be no more
here.\" The interpreters, however, differ quite extraordinarily from
each other. But it seems to me that the prophet is speaking
figuratively, so that \"to make the disturbance strong\" is the same as:
to carry out the disturbance with force and power, so that no one can
resist it.

**About the strong (super robustum).**

Nones: over the power, or kingdom, and dominion (\"force\"), as in the
62nd Psalm, v. 12. \[Vulg.\] \"The power is GOD\'s.\" To Him all things
are subject, in His hand all things are; there is no strength and power
so great as to resist Him, yea, that would not be of Him, as He also
said above.

**V. 10: Who are they to him that punisheth them in the gate?**

The Hebrews call the place of judgment \"the gate\", where the judges
and the council sit and judge. Therefore, the opinion here is: these
godless people do not want 1) to be punished in a gathering of people,
not publicly in front of an assembly. So also our princes and larval
bishops interpret it as a mistake for words of God, that it makes their
godless nature obvious 2) before the common people 2c.

**Who teaches wholesome.**

The same word \[XXXX\] is in the 119th Psalm, v. 1: \"Blessed are those
who live without change,\" that is, blessed are those who live
wholesomely 2c. This is how Paul interpreted it \[2 Tim. 1, 13\].
Namely, those who had sound doctrine, sound faith and love, they would
not suffer. But how ungodliness cannot suffer the wholesome doctrine, we
experience daily.

**V. 11. Therefore, because you oppress the poor (diripiebatis).**

After a very friendly admonition, he now adds a threat in another
parable

1\) Here D. continues thus: that their sins be punished, but desire that
they be concealed, like our 2c.

2\) D. omits the following words.

to. He complains about what he always complained about above, namely the
epitome of all godlessness, the distrust against God and the violence
against the neighbor. - Instead of diripiebatis, it should more
correctly be said: you burden, you oppress the poor and put burdens on
them that they are not able to bear; you flay the poor rabble, you put
on unbearable estimates, you scrape goods together with right and wrong.

**And take the grain from them with great burdens (ablatum electum).**

That is, all that the poor have good, you appropriate, the best fields,
grounds, gardens you snatch by robbery and tyrannical avarice. Here let
the pope and his people consider themselves, 3) and our princes, the
suckers and devourers of the poor. Now if a poor man has a good field,
or whatever he may have, he is compelled to pay valuation of it.

**In the fine vineyards (Vineas amantissimas).**

In the lovely vineyards. This word is frequent in all the prophets and
in the Psalms: \"lovely, funny, pretty vineyards\".

**V. 12 For I know your transgression.**

With this word, when he says: \"I know\", he indicates the heart
movement of those people and his own, as if he wanted to say: You rage
so against the poor, you oppress them so, as if I do not see or know it,
about I see it very well, my eyes look on the poor. Nothing of all that
you do is hidden from me, however much I act for a time as if I did not
see it; that makes you blind. So it is also said in the tenth Psalm, v.
11: \"The wicked speaks in his rushing: God has forgotten, he has hidden
his face,

3\) Here D. continues to the end of the section so fött: who are in
truth devoured the poor. Because übet\^Kl they have taken everything,
what only somewhere the best gewesmÄi, with not even honorable tricks.
Although the dominions can be maintained without great burdens to the
subjects, it is nevertheless due to the princes that they keep
moderation, so that they do not prove to be tyrants instead of being
princes, and as disturbers of the subjects instead of being protectors.
For God hates all injustice.

1732 D. XXV, 434-4S6. Interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 5, 12-17. W. VI,
2S08-2SII. 1733

he will never see it.\" Thus Ezek. 8, 12: \"They say, \'The Lord does
not see us;\' but the Lord has left the land.\" Likewise Cap. 9, 9. Also
Isa. 29, 15: \"Who sees us? and who knows us?\"

**V. 13. Therefore the wise man must keep silent at the same time.**

^1^) Here belongs the whole eleventh Psalm \[v. 2. 3.\]: \"For behold,
the wicked draw the bow, and lay their arrows upon the sinews, to shoot
withal the upright. For they overthrow the ground; what shall the
righteous do?\" 2) Here let him perish who will not be exalted.
\[Revelation 22:11:\^ \"He that is unclean, let him be unclean after
all.\"

**For it is an evil time.**

\"Evil\" he calls them because the evil ones have the upper hand.

**V.14. Then the LORD God of hosts will be with you, as you boast.**

This is an objection. Since the godless Jews did not recognize their
godlessness, they protected themselves with the promises of God, namely
that they were the people of God; that the Lord had promised that he
would be in their midst, and that the Lord had not done this to any
other people. Therefore, they accused the holy prophets of lying,
proclaiming the future wrath of God, as if they were speaking against
the law of God and against the promises of God. Such ungodly speeches
were clearly indicated by the prophet Micah in the second chapter \[v.
6. f.\]: \"They say that one should not cry; for such crying does not
befall us, we will not be so put to shame. The house of Jacob comforts
itself: \"Do you think that the spirit of the Lord is shortened? Should
he want to do such a thing?\" 2c. All these ungodly speeches are
invalidated by the prophet Amos, who says: \"Seek good and not evil\"
2c. as if he wanted to say: \"The Lord has promised that he will be with
you, but only if you are godly.

1\) D. f: That is, so great is the tyranny that no one dares to teach
the word of God, but immediately they threaten with the cross and draw
the swords, as soon as someone begins to murmur against them. Here 2c.

2\) D. omits the following.

blessed are you if you have had what he commanded you, as Micah also
adds \[Cap. 2:7\], \"It is true, my sayings are kind to the pious. \"2c.
3)

**V. 16. There will be wailing in all the streets.**

He goes over to the threat in a very hard transition. As if he wanted to
say: Because you do not judge rightly, therefore you will fall into a
terrible judgment. All places will be full of lamentation, all roads and
paths, and not only in the cities, but also the farmers will lament, as
follows:

**And one will call to the Ackermann to mourn, and to lament, who can
cry there.**

As if he wanted to say: I will cause a general mourning in the whole
kingdom, so that whoever can mourn shall mourn. It will be such a great
lamentation that there will be no one who is not weary of his life; both
old men and young men will lament, \"everything that can howl.

**V. 17. There will be wailing in all the vineyards.**

In vineis, that is, the vintners. We have \[in the Vulgate\] the bad
reading: viis.

**For I will go among you, says the Lord.**

That is when I will trample you in my fury and strike you as I struck
Egypt.

3\) D. f: For this is the difference between the promises of the law and
the gospel, that the law promises what it promises under a certain
condition, as the text clearly says \[Deut. 18, 5. Rom. 10, 5.\]:
\"Whoever does this, he will live in it.\" \"Honor thy father and
mother, that thou mayest live long upon the earth.\" For everywhere it
is attached to the condition of our works, as is clear from the 28th
chapter of the 5th book of Moses, indeed, from your whole law. But what
the gospel promises, it promises by grace for free, without the
condition of any work. Therefore, whoever accepts the promise in faith
will certainly receive it, and neither the past evil life nor the
present and future weakness will hinder him. For the mercy of God, which
is shown to us in Christ, is certain and unfailing. When faith looks at
this, it certainly receives what is promised for the sake of Christ,
without the condition of a work or our worthiness.

1734 L. XXV, 436-4W. Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2SN-2SI4.
1735

V. 18. **Woe to those who desire the day of the Lord.**

He says this against the despisers of the sermon and the stiff-necked
people who accused the prophet of lying and foolishness and mocked him
by denying that everything he predicted would happen. Of these it is
written in 2 Petr. 3, 4: \"They say, Where is the promise of his future?
For after the fathers have fallen asleep, all things remain as they were
from the beginning of the creation\" 2c. This is how it has always been
from the beginning of the world: just as the wicked did not believe the
promises of God, so they also despised the threats until they perished
completely, while they were not aware of it. The same thing is being
done nowadays by our godless preachers 1) in that they are very sure to
despise the Word, which is now revealed to the world again through
God\'s great goodness, and to mock those who threaten them with
misfortune and ruin. For they saw thus: 2) \"O it is a passing over of
the priests\", the matter will change; the time will come when all these
things will cease, and the priests will be held in the highest honor.
These are in the same damnation in which the godless Jews were, of whom
Amos remembers here and of whom Peter says. 3)

**For the day of the Lord is darkness and not light.**

\"The Lord\'s day\" he calls the whole time of that tribulation which he
predicts. \"Day\" 4) but

1\) D.: the godless papists

2\) D. continues thus: It is a short storm by which the clergy is
shaken, but in a short time the thing will change, and all these things
will cease 2c.

3\) In immediate connection with this follows in D.: for he calls \"the
day of the Lord\" the calamity which he predicts, and says: \"Woe to
those who desire the day of the Lord.\" But because, when the prophet
threatened that such things would come, they said assuredly, Let only
the day of the Lord come which thou threatenest, as if to say, That
shall never come to pass which thou foretellest, he saith, Woe to such
and so sure despisers, for they shall feel that the day of the Lord is
darkness, and not light; that is, they shall know that I have lied
nothing, and suffer punishment for their ungodliness. For \"darkness\"
denotes tribulation, \"light\" comfort, joy, well-being. - For this the
whole following passage is missing.

4\) Instead of \"Us8 it would probably be better to read lux here, which
both D. and the Zwickau manuscript offer.

is, as I also said above \[Cap. 4, 13.\], with the Hebrews happiness and
welfare and joyful times, as this image is frequent everywhere in the
Psalms. Therefore he says that everything happy will be full of
unhappiness and mourning.

**V. 19. As if someone flees before the lion.**

Now he threatens these despisers with a terrifying downfall, as if he
wanted to say: \"Well, despise 5) only the word of the Lord; you are
safe, you think it will not happen that you fall into future misfortune;
but it will be so impossible that you do not perish, as it is impossible
that he, who flees from a lion, runs into a bear. You will not be able
to escape in such a way that, while you have the confidence that you
will escape, you will run into the midst of misfortune. I will take away
all your protection 2c. Thus, nowadays, our measuring monkeys will have
the princes, to whom they take refuge, as enemies. Of course, they seek
an excellent protection against God, whom they flee!

**V. 21. I am grief-stricken for your holidays and despise them.**

Here he answers them again, as it were, by an objection, because they
undoubtedly held in high esteem that worship which they had wrought,
thinking that it was very pleasing to God, since they sang much,
sacrificed much, built great temples 2c. All this they held against the
prophets, just as today our wicked hold against us the great costs of
the churches, their songs. 7) The prophet answers: I am disgusted with
all this and despise it; I also dislike everything, no matter how holy
it may be, because you are godless and do everything out of a godless
heart. We see this in great detail in the first chapter of Isaiah. So
the Scriptures and the Spirit in the Scriptures utterly condemn whatever
the ungodly do, whatever they undertake to please God, even if they
follow the works of the law, because they are not holy.

5\) D.: \"orUsrnrnkis; in the manuscript: 8F6, O0Ntsnanitk.

6\) D. f: and in twofold,

7\) D. f: Do you think that all this is in vain?

1736 **L XXV, 43S-44I.** Interpretation of Amos (1.), cap. 5, 21-24.
**W. VI, 25I4-2SI7.** 1737

their heart is ungodly and without faith. This is what is said in
Proverbs 21:27: \"The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination\" 2c.
And 1 Sam. 15, 22: \"Obedience is better than sacrifice.\" And if these
works of the Jews, so holy in appearance, who were God\'s people and had
the word of God, because they were done without faith, 1) are condemned,
what is it then that our godless papists pride themselves so much with
their foolish and cold works? 2)

**And may not smell into your assemblies.**

Moses connects this verbum with all sacrifices: the sacrifices of the
godly would be a who smell to the Lord, as can be seen everywhere. But
here he rejects the sacrifices of the wicked altogether, and says he
will not accept the smell, that is, when you come together to sacrifice,
I will not have a smell, I will not accept your sacrifices, they will be
a stench to me 2c.

**V.22. Though you offer me burnt offerings and grain offerings, I have
no pleasure in them.**

XXXX, oblationes, grain offering. This they always added to the burnt
offerings.

**So I also do not like to look at your cowardly sacrifices of
thanksgiving.**

That is, whatever you offer will not please me. I will not accept your
peace offerings, however fat they may be, 3) even if you sacrifice
fattened cattle.

V. 23. **Just take away from me the noise of your songs.**

Here we see that they also sang. But how he considers everything else
ungodly and

1\) Instead of kaetain in the Erlanger is to be read Laeta according to
the manuscript with the Weimar edition.

2\) D.t: But you must notice that at this point the prophet does not
only focus on the present people and the present worship, but entirely
on the abolition of the law and worship. For this is how they \[the
prophets\] tend to move on in their sermons to the promise of the Gospel
and the abolition of the present worship and kingdom.

3\) The following is missing from D.

condemned, so also their songs or chants. This is certainly a great
boldness of the prophet, that he took the liberty to condemn the works
that seem to be so very holy. 4) But the prophets who condemned such
things were killed as ungodly and transgressors of the law who hindered
the worship of God. But the prophets who condemned such things were put
to death as ungodly men and transgressors of the law who hindered the
worship of God, as we also suffer today from being reproached for this.
5) But the Lord wants to be worshipped in faith. The ungodly 6) do not
please the Lord, no matter how great and brilliant their works may be.

V. 24. **But the law shall be revealed as water.**

After the threat, he brought in the kingdom of Christ here. And it is a
transition, as if he wanted to say: What is it that you praise your
sacrifices, your meal offerings and all these things? The time will come
when all these outward things will cease and righteousness will be
revealed in richest abundance. Therefore, it seems to me that he is
definitely talking about the gospel being revealed through Christ. For
to be revealed is to be preached and made known, which at that time had
not yet happened. Therefore, he passes here from the reprehensible
worship to the right worship, which is pleasing to God. For this is what
all prophets do, when they want to present the right righteousness
through Christ, they condemn all the works of unbelievers, no matter how
holy they may appear to be. The same is in the 40th Psalm, v. 7.
\"Sacrifice and meat offering are not pleasing to thee, but thou hast
opened mine ears.\" Therefore, when he says, \"like water,\" he
indicates the riches of grace to be proclaimed through the gospel, as a
similar thing is found in Isaiah \[Isa. 48:18\].

**And justice like a strong stream.**

It indicates the power and effect of the Word. Because the word breaks
through and

4\) Erlanger: camouflage instead of tarn in the manuscript. In D. it is
missing.

5\) D.t: that they cry out that we condemn good works, since we punish
and condemn their worship and works.

6\) Instead of \"the ungodly\" D. has: But they are without faith.

1738\> 441-443 Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi. Wn-ssrs. 1739

also runs where the raging of Satan and the adversaries is in full
swing. It breaks through like a stream, the rulers may want it or not;
they cannot suppress it 2c.

V. 25. **Have you of the house of Israel offered me sacrifices and grain
offerings in the wilderness these forty years? Yes, indeed.**

This passage was cited by Stephen Apost. 7, 42. f., but with different
words. But he hit the meaning perfectly, which is what all apostles do
when they quote sayings of the prophets. But what shall we say to this
passage, which disputes with many other passages of Scripture? For it is
quite evident that not all of this people were godless, as Scripture
also testifies of them in many places. And Balaam says 4 Mos. 23, 21:
\"One sees no toil in Jacob, and no work in Israel. The LORD his God is
with him\" 2c. There he praises the people extraordinarily because of
their excellent godliness, so that also some interpreters take offense
at it, and here in various ways they struggle. 1) But it is to be
brought into agreement in this way: in the holy Scriptures one must be
very careful and see to the figure of speech, which the grammarians call
synecdoche, that both are said by the same people, as it is to be
understood here. Thus, in the 78th 2) Psalm, v. 18, he puts their
ungodliness on them and punishes them because of their lack of faith.

1\) Instead of the following until the end of this section, D.: But at
this point such a subtlety is not necessary. For we see that the
prophets have often made use of the synecdoche, that they generally say
of the valid people, either it is good, or it is bad, while they
understand this nevertheless only of a part of the people. Thus, for the
sake of some godly people, Moses calls the whole nation a royal
priesthood, the people of God, the saints, while the greater part of the
people was evil. So here he calls them idolaters, although many were
godly who had not served idols. Therefore the opinion is: You are like
your fathers 2c.

2\) The manuscript may read 77; in the Erlangen and Weimar manuscripts
incorrectly: In psalrno 11. In the Zwickau manuscript correctly: psatm
77.

He says: \"And tempted God in their hearts to ask for food for their
souls\" 2c. And of the same sin he says praisingly in another Psalm
\[Ps. 105, 40.\] that they acted godly in asking for food. So different
and opposite are the sayings about one and the same history. But that is
why I said that the word of God has the whole people in mind, and yet it
also divides them into two parts. For there were undoubtedly also godly
among them, whom he does not punish, since he remembers the idols, and
on the other hand excludes the godly, since he mentions godliness and
the right worship, which the godly followed with Moses 2c. The wicked
murmured because of the food, and yet it was given for the godly. And so
both are true, but because of that murmuring those were rejected who did
not believe, but the godly were preserved, for whose sake the food was
also given. And this is how this passage in Amos is to be understood.
There were many godly people in Jacob who did not worship idols, and he
does not speak of them, although **he** remembers Jacob; but the greater
part were godless, and their idolatry he punishes. They did many ungodly
things, which the Lord bore for the time being, as it says in the 95th
Psalm, v. 10: \"That I had forty years\' trouble with this people\" 2c.
See Heb. 3:17. So here he accuses them of idolatry, as if to say: You
are like your fathers; your fathers sinned against God with idols and
abominations, so you pursue the same ungodliness, therefore everything
will fall away and be taken away from you, whatever you trust in, all
your righteousness, and you will be taken away.

**V. 26. the star of your gods.**

What kind of star this had been, one cannot infer from the scripture. 3)

3\) D. f: Stephen, in the Acts of the Apostles fEap. 7. 43.\] calls it
\"the star of the god Remphan\".

1740 XXV, 443-445. interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 6, 1. 2. W. V!,
25)9-2521. 1744

**The sixth chapter.**

The prophet persists in proclaiming the future captivity which he has
always threatened above. And he begins here again another sermon, in
which he comprehends at the same time the two tribes \[Judah and
Benjamin\], both those which were in Samaria and those which were in
Israel, and says beforehand that all shall be desolated and carried away
by the Assyrian. We will stick to this simple understanding, that the
Babylonian captivity is understood, not the last one, as some want, 2)
because necessity does not force us to depart from this simple text. But
he prophesies against the princes and nobles of the people, who lived
splendidly and had all riches in abundance, but in this he does not
accuse them of ungodliness, that they were rich, but that they had
obtained this wealth by fraud and robbery or oppression of the poor, 3)
as we have seen above. Otherwise, having wealth is not evil, but having
unjustly acquired wealth and abusing it is indeed evil 2c.

**V. 1. Woe to the proud in Zion, and to those who rely on Mount
Samaria).**

The word confiditis need not be connected with the following, but this
is the opinion: you are insolent and stiff-necked, you are
extraordinarily proud, that is, you who are on Mount Samaria, that is,
you who dwell securely in your kingdom.

**Who boast of the noblest among the Gentiles, and walk in the house of
Israel.**

1\) Instead of the following sentence D.: But he begins here a new
sermon, in which he understands at the same time the kingdom of Judah
and the kingdom of Israel, and says that all shall be devastated and
carried away by the Assyrian.

2\) D. omits \"do not - want\".

3\) From here to the end of the paragraph has D\>: and abused to
splendor, to court, to wrong against others 2c. as we have seen above.

4\) Vulgate: Oonüäitis in monto Kamarias. This is what the
interpretation refers to. Luther interprets it like this: You are full
of self-confidence who are on the mountain of Samaria.

^5^) This blanking out is indeed not bad: You are hopeful and walk with
pride in the house of Israel. But according to the Hebrew it can also be
read like this: you enter the house of Israel for your own sake, that
is, you seek your own in the kingdom of Israel, you turn everything to
your advantage, since to enter and go out, to speak in the Hebrew way,
means to have one\'s way, as Lucas also said in the Acts of the Apostles
\[Cap. 1, 21. 9, 28.\] spoke, and Deut. 28, 6. \"Blessed shalt thou be
when thou goest in, blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out.\" So also
here, as if he wanted to say: You take everything for your tyranny, you
seek only your own 2c.; everything you do, you do for yourselves, that
you benefit only yourselves.

**V. 2 Go to Calne and see.**

^6^) Here you see what he wanted, since he said: Ye enter for yourselves
into the house of Israel. But it is the opinion of this passage: your
kingdom is small, but nevertheless you feed so many princes and mighty
plunderers that far mightier kingdoms would hardly be able to feed them.
Just as if we were to say of Germany that Deutsch-

5\) D. has this passage quite differently: What the Latin translator has
given: optimales eapila popuiorum, translate so: Those who consider
themselves the best among the people, they go along according to their
favor in the house of Israel. For the prophet has the hope of the Jews
in mind, that they boasted that they were God\'s people before all the
Gentiles, as today our adversaries boast against us of the name of the
church. Not only does he punish this presumption, but also the ungodly
doctrine that they taught everything they wanted for profit.

6\) All Dietrich brings about the second verse is this: \"Go to Kalne.\"
He makes a conclusion from the greater to the lesser. Behold the
neighboring kingdoms of the Gentiles, which have been far greater,
mightier, richer than the festering one, which is surrounded on all
sides by enemies: and yet, when the evil day of visitation \*) came,
they were laid waste for their sins. And yet you, with your sins so
great, let yourselves dream that all is well, you fear nothing for
yourselves, but spend, heap up riches\" builds Magnificent Houses 2c.
This is the very simple opinion of the prophet.

1742 L. XXV. 44S-447. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI. 2S2I-2S2S.
174A

The first is that the country fed so many bishops, magicians of the
people, that to feed them, the riches of the Assyrian people would
hardly have sufficed 2c. About \"Kalne\" the interpreters go
extraordinarily far apart; consult them. - \"Hemath\" is a country, now
called Antioch, in Syria. 1)

**Which have been better kingdoms than these (Ad optima quaeque).**

That is, look at these kingdoms, look at the princes, compare everything
that is best in those kingdoms with your kingdom, and you will see that
you far surpass them, both in princes and in splendor 2c. For you can
read it also in the male gender: the best.

**And their limit is greater than your limit.**

This is what Isaiah Cap. 5, 8. says: \"Woe to those who move one house
to another and one field to another until there is no more room\", that
is, you rob everything for your own benefit, so that there is no place
left for the poor. So here: \"your border,\" that is, the border of your
possession is very large 2c.

V. 3. **who respect you far from the evil day. 2)**

That is, keeping to the day of captivity, you will all be taken away.

**And always seeks to regiment iniquity.**

Thus it is said in the Hebrew: and you go to sit in unrighteousness,
that is, all that you deal with, all your intentions are directed to
that you may become rich, that you may have abundance of all things,
whether this be rightly or wrongly. You think that there is nothing in
it, however you arrange the matter 2c. 3)

1\) The Zwickau manuscript offers: \"Hemath\" is the country in which
Antioch is located, in Syria, a very famous kingdom.

2\) Vulgate: Hui \[spuruti \[stis in ckisrn nialurn - You who are set
apart for the evil day. This is what the interpretation refers to.

3\) The whole interpretation of v. 3. reads with D.: \"You who are set
apart.\" It pleases me that it is translated this way: and yet they are
put to flight, dis-

V. 4. **and sleep on ivory couches.**

Now he describes their ostentation and ungodly splendor.

**And do abundance (lascivitis) with your beds.**

Instead of lascivitis, it should more correctly read: you are indulging
in splendor or abundance. He rejects the splendor and excess of beds at
court and in the royal apartments, 4) of which even our princes have an
excess today.

**You eat the lambs from the flock.**

That is, everything that is the best. - 5) \"And the fattened calves.\"
\"The best belongs to the masters.\"

V. 5 **And play upon the psaltery, and make up songs unto yourselves, as
David did.**

That is, as if they were like David, they also play the psaltery, while
they do nothing less. David used the psaltery to praise God, to inflame
the heart against God and to awaken the spirit through the word of God,
6) but they use it for their splendor, so that it delights the ears 2c.

**V. 6. You are not concerned about the harm to Joseph.**

This is what I said at the beginning of this chapter: The Lord does not
condemn, scatter in the evil day. That is, even though they were more
powerful than you are now, they still suffered the punishment in their
time, and however secure they were and thought they were, they could not
escape the day of visitation. What follows: \"You seek the throne of
unrighteousness,\" is a Hebrew idiom for: you rule in an unrighteous
manner, you oppress the poor with injustice 2c.

4\) Instead of the following, D. has: for there must be a measure. in
the effort.

5\) This last piece is missing in D.

6\) D. continues thus: you abuse it for splendor, so that you have a
feast for the ears, as they used to do before this time also with us in
the churches, since they not only did not understand or care about any
verse of the Scriptures correctly, but also sang godless songs of the
holy virgin and other saints, and used the music only to keep the people
in the churches by this pleasure, without any sense and understanding.
But at this time, after the word of God has been revealed and is
understood, nothing prevents it from being adorned and practiced with
honor of every kind, be it organs or other musical instruments
(symphoniae), as we see David also did.

[1744 **L. XXV. 447-4S0. Interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 6, 6-10. W.
VI, 2523-WM.** 1745]{.underline}

That one has wealth, but that one uses it evil, that is, only for his
own pleasure, that one does not help the poor, that one is not a
faithful steward of what God has given. So here he condemns this
ungodliness, that they did not care for the harm of Joseph, that is, for
the poor and afflicted people in the kingdom of Israel. They held no
right judgment, but oppressed and afflicted the poor in the Torah, as he
said above \[Cap. 5:10, 11\]. So today our princes suffer in all things
from the same ungodliness; there is no end to their splendor of every
kind, in all things they want to have abundance. In the meantime, the
poor suffer cold and hunger, everywhere there is deception; they do not
hear their subjects, yes, they press them with unbearable treasures and
suck out everything they have. This does not need many words, since the
matter speaks for itself. 1)

**V. 7 Therefore they shall go in front among those who are led away
captive.**

That is, those will be the first in punishment who have also been the
greatest in guilt.

**And shall stop the feasting of the pillories.**

Auferetur, that is, it will cease. It is properly read \[instead of
factio lascivientium in the Vulgate\]: convivium pomposorum.

**V. 8 For the LORD has sworn by his soul, says the LORD.**

Such passages of Scripture Hilarius used to note in his books. 2)
Similarly the-

1\) D.f: But all this would still be bearable, if only they would not
allow the churches to be so miserably devastated, since they neither
teach themselves, nor even feed those who can teach. For the income of
the priests\' monasteries over which they preside, the land, the
castles, the cities, were first given to them by godly people for the
purpose of helping the church. But they will have to give an account to
the one who has this title in the Psalm,\*) that he will crush the kings
in the time of his wrath, Ps. 110, 5.

2\) D.f: to confirm the article of the Trinity, and admittedly, one
cannot easily escape them.

v\) The Jena and the old translator read kuvst, whereas the Wittenberg,
the Erlangen and the Weimar editions read Navsnt. The former seems
better to us.

he passage is the one in the first book of Moses \[Cap. 19, 24.\]: \"The
LORD caused it to rain from the LORD.\" See Hilarius after.

**I am grief-stricken for their palaces.**

Instead of domos, it should more correctly read \"their palaces,\" that
is, \[the houses\] magnificently built at great expense, of which they
are so proud.

**With everything inside.**

In Hebrew it says: with all the fullness, that is, all that is in the
land will perish. This is a Hebrew expression, which is also found in
the Psalm \[Ps. 24, 1.): \"The earth is the LORD\'s, and all that is
therein\" (et plenitudo ejus).

**V. 10: That every man must be taken away from his family and carry his
bones out of the house.**

He describes the misery of the captivity as if he wanted to say: \"So
great will be the misery, so great the strangulation, that because of
the number of the dead there will be no room to bury the bodies of the
dead, but they will be forced to burn them in the house. A harsh threat
with which he frightens them.

**And will say, Be satisfied; for they would not that the name of the
LORD should be remembered.**

The cantilevers struggle in many ways at this point. But according to my

3\) D. omits the beginning of this piece and puts instead: From this one
can take a twofold meaning, either that he says: They do not realize
that such a great punishment is imposed by God for the sake of sins, or
that he wants to punish the extreme perversity and wickedness. As if to
say: they are so wicked that they do not want the name of God to be
remembered, because as soon as they hear the name of God, they think
they are hearing the devil. Thus in Christ\'s time there was the
greatest licentiousness and the highest idolatry, so much so that even
the heathen abused it for fornication. So also in our time, when the
gospel first came forth, the mass and the invocation of the saints had
come to the highest degree, and it was in truth as Jude says in his
epistle fV. 4\]: \"They have drawn the glory of God upon their own
will\" 2c. The same extreme ungodliness he also punishes here, that they
did not even want to hear the name of God. For it is a common way of
speaking that \"to remember the name of the Lord\" is put for teaching
and preaching. Thus in the 48th Psalm 2c.

1746\" L xxv. 4 \"o-4SL Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi, M\^ssss.
1747

Opinion is a Hebrew expression that is frequent in the Scriptures. Thus
in the 45th Psalm, v. 18: \"O Lord, I will remember thy name.\" And so
now and then in the Psalms. Hence, \"to remember the name of the LORD\"
is to preach and boast the name of the LORD- to spread it by preaching.
Christ also used this way of speaking: \"Do this in remembrance of me\"
\[Luc. 22, 19.\], that is: remember me, you shall do the word when you
do this 2c. Likewise in Isaiah, Cap. 64, 5: \"They that remembered thee
in thy ways.\" 1) In this passage it seems as if the Lord wants to say:
\"Everything will be so full of sorrow, there will be nothing from which
they can receive comfort, everything will be so full of lamentation that
they will no longer remember the preaching of the name of the Lord. They
will not be able to do anything but lament, they will not preach the
name of the Lord because they are full of sorrow. All worship and
praising and preaching the name of the Lord will cease.

**V. 11. For behold, the LORD has commanded that the great haners should
be protected, that they should gain clefts; and do small houses, that
they should gain gaps.**

That is, all houses he will turn back, both great and small, of which
you now boast, and are secure in your ungodly nature 2c.

**V. 12 Who can run with horses or plow with oxen on rocks?**

Again a rural image of the farmer of Thekoa; everywhere this shepherd
remains the same, he remembers the plow animals, the horses and cows. 2)
Perhaps the prophet wanted to indicate this, that one should not use the
cows for plowing, but for threshing, or: that pregnant or nursing cows
are not suitable for plowing; otherwise it is certain,

1\) The following to the end of the section is missing in D. 2) Here D.
continues like this: But the opinion is this; on rocks no one will drive
his horse to run, if he does not want to spoil himself and the horse
quickly at the same time. So no one will plow with oxen on rocks, as if
he wanted to say: That people 2c.

that they plow with oxen and cows. But the opinion of the picture is as
if he wanted to say: This people is unskilled and unfit for 3)
everything the Lord uses them for 4); they are completely unskilled for
any office of God, God cannot use them. Therefore, the Lord is weary of
them, despises and rejects them. They no longer please him, they no
longer do anything to please God, as follows:

**For you turn the right into bile rx.**

Instead of in amaritudinem, it should more correctly read \"in gall.
This is what he said above, namely \[Cap. 2, 6. 7. 5, 7.\]: You afflict
and tread down the miserable and afflicted, you do not hold right
judgment for the poor rc. 5)

V. 13 **And say, Are we not strong enough with our horns?**

This is also an image that the Latins use, as if he wanted to say: \"You
boast of your tyranny, with erect necks you continue against the law and
the Lord as if you were doing right: You continue against the law and
the Lord, as if you were doing right. So you will be punished by
yourselves because of your wickedness, therefore you will be led away. I
will bring the Assyrian army upon you, which shall tread down all things
from the entering in of the kingdom of Israel even unto the going out,
so that nothing shall be left 2c. 6)

3\) D. continues to the end of the passage thus: to every office of God,
as a horse to run on rocks or a bullock to plow on rocks. It is not
suitable for the world regiment, not for godliness and religion. In
short, God cannot use them. Therefore, the Lord is tired of them,
despises and rejects them, they no longer please Him, as follows:

4\) Instead of sos, it should probably read like this.

5\) D. f: But it does not displease me if one takes \"right\" after a
common image for teaching, as judging stands for teaching or instructing
to godliness, so that the opinion would be: \"You turn right into
gall\", that is, you condemn the word of God and the teaching of
godliness as heresy and ungodly error. And in this way it is also
rightly interpreted above,

6\) D. adds another passage: \[V. 14. 1 \"From the place where they go
to Hemath to the brook in the wilderness.\" This is the way they were
led captive through Moab to Assyria, as Isaiah chap. 15 reads.

1748 L. XLV, 4SS-4S4. Interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 7, 1-3. W. VI,
2W0-M33. 1749

**The seventh chapter.**

What he has prophesied and threatened with clear words so far, he
prophesies here with dark words and visions. The mercy and
long-suffering of God is praised to us, who does not want the death of
the sinner, but rather that he converts and lives. Therefore, He
postpones the punishment and invites to repentance. But finally, when he
sees that he can do nothing, neither by threats nor by friendly
enticements, he is extremely angry and strikes. This is how he has
always dealt with the Jews, with Pharaoh, and with the traitor Judas, on
whom he has shown his terrible judgments, so that they might be examples
of his wrath. We see the same thing here. He sent his word so
abundantly, he exhorted in many ways, sometimes with revealed words,
sometimes by visions, to entice them to repentance. But since all this
was of no avail, he rejected this whole people in a frightening way.

**V. 1. Behold, there stood one making locusts.**

Formator locustarum, that is, \"who made locusts\", since it began to
grow or the late rains to arrive. This is a description of the time by
which he indicates that the locusts are made at the most inopportune
time, namely at the beginning, when the seeds are rising, since the
seeds and all fruits can suffer nothing less than locusts, which eat
them away 2c.

**After the king had his sheep sheared (Post tonsionem regis).**

One wants, 1) that by tonsio regis \[the shearing of the king\] the
grazing on the field is indicated, as also our farmers are used to do at
the beginning, when the seeds begin to grow, 2) and this shearing or
grazing of the seeds the kings reserved for themselves.

1\) D.: voluit instead of: volunt in the manuscript.

2\) D. continues: that they graze the tops of the growing seed. But I
like better that one understands it simply: since now first the sheep of
the king had been shorn.

and claimed it for themselves, as our princes claim the fish and game of
the forest.

**V. 3: When they wanted to eat up the herbs in the land.**

Instead of consummasset, it should more correctly read: \"When they
wanted to eat up the herbage in the land. This is a threat of God, by
which he indicates that it will happen that the army of the Assyrians,
which he calls locusts, will devastate everything, and nothing will be
left.

**O Lord, have mercy!**

Here the prophet makes himself a wall for the people, so that he averts
the wrath of God, so that he may not destroy them. 3) But still, he does
not completely turn away the wrath of God, for the LORD postponed the
plague from striking immediately at the beginning, as he had threatened.
4) Therefore, this is the attitude of the prophet, since he says:

**Who will help Jacob up again? because he is low.**

As if he wanted to say: Spare, Lord, that you do not destroy, do not
send the king of the Assyrians against Jacob, since Jacob is nothing
compared to the Assyrian; who will therefore help? That is, who can make
Jacob stand against the mighty Assyrian?

**V. 3.^5^ ) Then the LORD repented, and said, Well, it shall not be.**

Namely, now, at this time, when the kingdom is in bloom. For at that
time the

3\) D. continues: And indeed this prayer was not in vain, for the Lord
2c.

4\) D. f: Therefore, this passage contains a wonderful consolation and a
beautiful example of how powerful a believing prayer is and how much it
is able to do. These examples should also inspire us not only to pray
diligently and often, but also to pay great attention to our prayers and
those of others, since God has promised that He will hear us and shows
by such examples that He keeps His promise. But this is the attitude of
the prophet, since he says:

5\) Here the Weimar edition has (incorrectly) the verse number \"6th\".

1750 xxv, 4S4-4S7. Interpretations on the prophets. W. vi, 2533-2835.
1751

Kingdom of Israel at its peak when Jeroboam reigned, who was a good and
excellent king in outward appearance, as we said at the beginning \[in
the preface\].

**V. 4. And behold, the Lord called the fire to punish with it.**

That is) I have seen a matter negotiated, in which one dealt with it
that after negotiated matter should be punished with fire. But the fire
was so great that it consumed not only the wood, but also, which is
contrary to nature, the great depths, that is, standing waters and other
seas. 2) He indicates the fierceness of the fire, that it not only dried
up the water, which is also usually dried up by the blazing sun, but
also the deep waters 2c.

**And already ate a part of it.**

Instead of partem it should \[according to the Hebrew\] more correctly
read: the field. The summa of all this is: he compares the kingdom to a
great deep and a fertile field. At that time the kingdom of Israel was
in bloom, as I have said, since Jeroboam reigned. Nothing was less in
view, nor was anything less believed, than that this kingdom should be
laid waste. But here he threatens that all should perish and be consumed
by fire. 4) For as a deep or a small field are nothing against a
devouring fire, so also he considers the kingdom of Israel to be nothing
compared to the power of the Assyrians who were to come through the
judgment of God 2c.

**V. 7. And he had the lead cord (trulla cementarii) in his hand.**

The Hebrew word does not mean a mason\'s trowel, but a lead-loth or a
straightedge, in ordinary language \"a straightedge,\" which masons use
to make the walls straight. And since it is said here: The Lord stood on
a wall

1\) The first sentence reads with D.: I have seen that God let fire come
to Him, which should devastate everything far and wide.

2\) The following is missing from D.

3\) The following sentence reads with D.: He calls \"the deep\" the
great and densely dwelling people.

4\) The following is missing from D.

of the lead cord, this is a Hebrew way of speaking, that is, he stood on
the maller made straight with a lead cord.

**V. 8. I will no longer overlook him.**

This means that even though I will postpone for a while the captivity
that I threatened Israel with, I will no longer overlook their sins. I
will punish them in some part, I will straighten and adjust the
protruding stones with my guide, that is, I will punish the sins of the
king or the king\'s house. And in this third vision he threatens
misfortune to the royal house of Jeroboam, with the exclusion of the
other people, of whom he says he wants to scourge for a time. It is
therefore the opinion, as if he wanted to say: Just as a mason uses his
guide to set in order the stones that stand out and are not well aligned
with the others, so that a proper assembly may come into being: so too,
by my judgment of the great captivity of the whole kingdom in the midst
of the people, I will set the house of King Jeroboam straight, as he
immediately adds.

**V. 9.^5^ ) But the high places of Isaac shall be laid waste.**

Here he mixes the three visions with each other, as if to say: what I
have foretold will happen, but still I will postpone a little the two
things I have now threatened the whole kingdom with, but I will not
postpone the third. And what we read \[in the Vulgate\]:

Excelsa idoli, should be read more correctly like this: 6) the altars of
mockery. He calls the godless worship of godlessness altars or houses of
mockery, because even

5\) The Weimar edition asked this still with drawn to the eighth verse.
Only the following section has the verse number \"9.

6\) Instead of the following in this passage D. has: The altars of
Isaac. But he calls so either a temple, which is so called by the
patriarch Isaac, or the whole people of Israel, although the prophet has
the meaning of the word in mind, because Isaac has his name from
mocking. And he punishes with this name the godless worship, because
superstitious, likewise self-chosen works or services are nothing but a
kind of mockery, whereby God is mocked, who promotes another worship in
his word.

1752 **XXV. 4S7-t59.** Interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 7, 9. 10. W.
**VI, S53S-2S38.** 1753

The godless mock God with their own invented worship. Thus Ishmael mocks
the good Isaac, as also Paul says, Gal. 4, 29: \"But as in those days he
that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit, so it is now also.\" Thus the ungodly always mock the preaching
of the godly with their statutes of men This battle of Isaac and Ishmael
will never cease.

**And the churches (sanctificationes) of Israel will be destroyed.**

Sanctificatio, a foundation (\"gestifft\"). Thus it says in the Psalm
\[Ps. 114, 2.\]: \"Then Judah became his sanctuary, Israel his
dominion\", that is, Judah is \"his bishopric\", in Judah he wanted to
have the priesthood, and in Israel his dominion, that is, the kingdom.
All this, he says, shall be laid waste.

**And I will make myself a sword over the house of Jeroboam.**

This actually goes to the king. He threatens the king\'s house, that is,
the descendants of the king, with destruction, which occurred since
Jeroboam was dead, since Zechariah, the godless son of Jeroboam, was
killed, 2 Kings 15:10.

**V. 10. Then Amaziah sent.**

^1^) Here we have an example of the dispute and the mockery, of which I
said shortly before. This history is extremely remarkable, in which one
can see what godlessness is and what it thinks of the word of God; how
it despises everything that is of God, so that its own remains unharmed.
Thus the godless priest Amaziah here scorns and despises the godly
prophet Amos, who was despised and a lowly shepherd. Therefore he
admonishes the king not to believe the prophecy of Amos, because it is a
lie, 3) since he speaks against the king and against the kingdom, of
which they were quite sure that it was established by God. Thus the God-

1\) The first sentence is missing in D.

2\) D. continues thus: and what the world, that is, the holiest and
wisest keep from the word of God 2c.

3\) D. f: and inflammatory speeches,

The godless blind one another through their ungodliness and seduce one
another, as the apostle says 2 Tim. 3, 13: \"But with evil men and
seducing men it becomes the longer the worse, they seduce and are
seduced. But he adds the ungodly teaching of the ungodly priest:

**Amos makes an uproar against you in the house of Israel.**

The reason for the proof is taken from the royal dignity, from the
quantity and greatness, as the enemies of the gospel nowadays ungodly
oppose the dignity and the majesty of the emperor in all things, 4)
likewise the reputation of the church 2c. So here the godless priest
opposes the kingdom of 5) Israel and the king to the prophet, of which
they were quite sure that both were fully instituted by God, 6) which
the prophets could not deny. And since the wicked knew that both the
king and the kingdom were instituted by GOD, they gave no ear to the
prophets who condemned the king and the kingdom, and thus concluded: If
the king is instituted by GOD, it follows that GOD is with the king; he
confirms the kingdom, therefore he is not in error. 7) Therefore, since
the prophets condemned these things, they were killed, they were accused
of stirring up sedition, as here Amaziah says: \"The land cannot suffer
his words.\" Thus Christ had to hear \[Luc. 23, 5.\], \"He hath stirred
up the people, that he hath taught to and fro throughout all the Jewish
country. \"2c. 8) But this is the form of the Word of God, so it goes
with the preachers of the Word.

4\) D. f: whom, as you know, we serve sacredly and conscientiously, and
the 2c.

5\) D.: the priesthood; so also the Hallic manuscript.

6\) Here D. continues thus: Based on this confidence, they either
despised and laughed at the prophets, or persecuted them because they so
concluded 2c.

7\) D. f: Therefore, he who speaks against the king, who threatens him
with evil, is a rebel. Thus the prophets were killed 2c.

8\) Instead of the last sentence D. has: Therefore it is not to be
wondered at that these things are also reproached to us. For why should
we have it better than our Lord Jesus Christ, than all holy prophets
have had it?

1754 \". xxv, 4üs-46i. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. vi. AW-Mi.
1755

**V. 11 For thus saith Amos, Jeroboam shall die by the sword.**

Here, he impiously falsifies the words of the prophet to make him all
the more detestable. Because he lies, and puts the words of the prophet
wrongly before the king. The prophet had threatened doom to Jeroboam\'s
Hanse, that is, to his children; but the latter twists the prophecy and
draws it unjustly on Jeroboam. We see the same thing happening to us in
all things today. All the prophets condemn this impiety. They condemned
the godlessness of the people, the godless people countered them, to
protect their godlessness, that they were God\'s people, that they had
the word of God 2c. But the prophets said that these promises did not
concern the ungodly, but only the godly, of whom there have always been
very few, and that only these should be preserved for the sake of the
promises made to the fathers, while all the rest have been corrupted.
And this is what Isaiah says \[Cap. 10, 22\]: \"For though your people,
O Israel, be as the sand of the sea, yet the rest of them shall be
converted,\" and what Paul says in the letter to the Romans, Cap. 11, 1:
\"Has God cast away His people? Let that be far off! For I am also an
Israelite\" 2c.; namely, the good part of the people \[is to be
preserved). 1)

**V. 13: For it is the king\'s pen.**

As if he wanted to say: Pack yourself, here you have nothing to
prophesy, \"it is the king\'s pen\". Beware that you do not set yourself
against the Israelite kingdom, which is ordered by God; flee, lest you
be seized and killed. Here you will not be able to find your food; go to
Judah. When the servants of the word hear this, they must be driven out
2c.

1\) Added by us according to the Zwickau manuscript.

**V. 14. I am not a prophet.**

At this point the interpreters have struggled in many ways, but in vain.
For what I have said above \[Cap. 1, 1.\] about the ranks of the
prophets also belongs here, so that the opinion is: I do not belong to
the number or to the state of the prophets. For they were ranks of the
prophets, therefore in the sacred histories \"children of the prophets\"
are called the hearers and followers of the prophets.

**But I am a cowherd 2c.**

As if he wanted to say: I do not preach for the sake of earning my
living with it, I do not seek my profit or wealth, but acquire my food
with my hand, I am satisfied with picking mulberries.

**V. 16. Do not drip against the house of Israel.**

The prophets often use this word for the word \"preach\", since the one
who preaches drips, namely when he announces the wrath of God and the
future punishment, that is, threatens and warns before the calamity
follows; when this happens, the great rain follows.

**V. 17. Your wife will become a harlot in the city.**

Fornicabitur, that is, it will be desecrated.

**Drin field is to be divided by the cord.**

\"By the cord,\" that is, your field shall be divided out.

**In an unclean land.**

That is, in captivity 2c.

1756 L. XXV, \"I-4Ü3. interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 8, 1-3. W. VI,
2S4I-2S44. 1757

**The eighth chapter.**

The last two chapters of this prophet are the last two sermons in which
he, tired of preaching, predicts that the whole nation will be
completely destroyed, both as far as the kingdom and the priesthood are
concerned. And it is very probable that he is not only talking about the
Babylonian desolation and captivity, but also about the last one, which
happened at the time of Christ, when the priesthood perished at the same
time as the kingdom.

**V. 1. 2. A basket of fruit.**

Puns in any language cannot be transferred into another language. So
here in Hebrew is a pun, 1) which we must transcribe. 2) The Hebrew word
means a basket or container, or a cage, in which animals are kept and
fed for fattening. However, it is interpreted in two different ways.
Some translate it by a basket of fruit, others by a container for
fattening cattle. But this last I like the best, namely, where birds are
fattened to be slaughtered. The opinion is, therefore, as if the prophet
said thus: Because this people is told everything in vain, so desolation
and slaughter is in store for it. Nothing but a miserable doom awaits
it, for I see a container full of slaughtered animals. It will come to
an end and everything that is of this people will be destroyed, as this
is clear from the following, where this play on words is explained.

**V. 2. The end has come upon my people Israel.**

It is a similar nature of words in Hebrew as if one said in German:

1\) D. f: or paronomasia,

2\) Instead of the following in this passage D. puts: For the word kelud
kais means a basket full of fruit. To this\'similar is another word,
Kss, which means the end. He plays therefore with similarly lautmven
words (parouüwuma): You have seen Kais, I will make k \"s, that is, I
will make an end with this people and will reject it, since I preach in
vain Utid teach,-As he adds

\"I see a rice\", and someone answered, \"I will tear you right\". It is
\"a rice\" or a branch something completely different than \"tear\" and
nevertheless an appeal (agnominatio) and a relationship of the sounds is
there. The same word play is here also in Hebrew, which cannot be
rendered in Latin.

**I don\'t want to miss him anymore.**

He used the same expression in the previous chapter \[v. 8\]: \"I will
no longer overlook him,\" that is, I will no longer turn a blind eye to
his ungodliness, I will no longer spare him.

**V. 3. And the songs in the church shall be turned into a howling
(Stridebunt cardines templi).**

That is to say, when this last captivity comes and the end of which I
have already spoken, all the palaces will be pulled down and destroyed,
the whole kingdom will fall, the royal house will come to ruin, it will
be utterly destroyed with impetuosity.

**There will be many dead bodies lying in all places, which will be
carried away secretly.**

Multi morientur in omni loco is poorly translated, but it is read that
way in Hebrew: The multitude of dead bodies will cause silence in all
places. 3) He describes the misery of the captivity. But he indicates
two things, first that the kingdom will cease and everything that
belongs to the kingdom will completely perish. Secondly, he predicts
that mankind as a whole will be trampled underfoot and destroyed. 4) For
he prophesies that there will be so many dead bodies that

3\) In the Zwickau, the Altenburg and the Hall manuscript projioikt, but
in D.: There will be a lot of corpses in all places, which will be taken
away with silence.

4\) From here to the end of the passage, D. has: that even those who
remain, if any, nevertheless live exceedingly miserable in mourning and
tears, for this he indicates by silence.

1758 L XXV, 463-466. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI, 2S44-2S47.
1759

there will be a great silence everywhere, great misery and great
loneliness. For this is what the Hebrew language indicates by the word
\"silence,\" namely, the destruction and desolation of all things and
the ruin, after which silence follows, that is, solitude and, as it
were, a desolation, as when a pestilence rages in any city, not many
people are visible 2c. Virgil 1) also calls the shadows \[of the dead\]
the silent ones. But that he says, \"In all places,\" indicates the ruin
and desolation of the whole people, as I said at the beginning of the
chapter.

**V. 4. Hear this, you who oppress the poor (conteritis).**

Now he reminds them of their godlessness, that they themselves are the
cause of this misfortune because of the sins he has punished above.
Instead of conteritis, it should more correctly be said: you devour and
put an end to the wretched in the land. You oppress the poor so much
that nothing of yours is left to them; all their goods come to you
through your godless avarice and tyranny.

**V. 5. When will the new moon have an end.**

Mensis \[\"new moon\"\] must be read, not messis \[harvest\].

**That we sell grain and give the epha ringers 2c.**

2\) He touches the main parts of their ungodly avarice, for he punishes
four things in them, as you see. As if he wanted to say: You do not have
your equals in avarice. So even you devour the poor, by your avarice you
bring it about that everything the poor have comes to you; and you
settle this by ungodly deceit, since you falsify the measure and the
price.

1\) Vir\^. 1iN. VI, v. 432.

2\) Instead of this passage, D.: The prophet uses a very clear image to
indicate their insatiable greed for money. He says: \"You are so stingy
and greedy that even the day of the new moon or the Sabbath, on which
you may not do any work or seek profit, seems to be a year. It is not
enough for you that six whole days are left to you for your profit and
your avarice; even the seventh and holy day of the Sabbath you desire to
desecrate with your trades, that you may accumulate riches. But he adds
how they do this, namely, with fraud and injustice, by reducing the
measure, counterfeiting the goods 2c.

**V. 6. for a pair of shoes.**

That is, you hold them in exceedingly low esteem. 3)

**And sell chaff for grain.**

This is the fourth vice he punishes, namely, that they sell refuse and
filth, or the chaff and dust of grain, for good grain, that they do not
sell purified grain to the poor, but mixed with dust and filth, so that
usury becomes greater. This is also what our merchants do, and all those
who have things to sell. But he punishes the peculiar avarice of the
chief priests, saying that they celebrate with displeasure the new moon
(mensem), that is, the day of the new moon (noviinnium). 4) For this day
was holy; on the same one did not work. He says that the priests kept
this new moon with displeasure, because they were not allowed to trade
on the same and to take the money of the poor with cunning. And so,
because of their ungodly avarice, the celebration of the feasts and the
Sabbaths made them disgusted.

**V. 7. Against the court of Jacob.**

In superbiam, that is, against the court.

**V. 8. Yes, it is to be completely overflowed as with water.**

Again, poorly translated in our Latin Bible. But this is how it says in
Hebrew: And it shall rise up, as a river, its ruin, and it shall be cast
out, and it shall be exhausted, as the river of Egypt. For the Hebrew
word is ambiguous, for it denotes both a river and light. Therefore it
is uncertain which of both he had wanted to indicate. But the opinion
is, as if he wanted to say: Like a sudden, violent downpour, so the
destruction and the desolation will come over my people, and it will be

3\) This is missing in D.

4\) The following to the end is missing in D., who puts for it: because
it was not allowed to trade at the same, and they could not stand the
poor after their money.

5\) According to the Weimar edition, D.: i\"\'; the Wittenberg and Jena
editions state: Isor.

4760 **L. XXV, 4SS-4S8.** Interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 8, 8-11.
**Ä. VI, 2547-2550.** 1761

flow away like the river of Egypt, that is, 1) it will be swallowed up
by the Assyrian, into whose land it will wander, and will be consumed
and swallowed up, just as the river of Egypt, when it flows back into
the sea, is swallowed up.

**V. 9. At the same time I will cause the sun to set in the middle of
the day.**

These are Hebrew idioms, as I have said above. For one does not read
that this ever happened, that the sun went down at noon. 2) Darkness
signifies adversity and an unhappy outcome of things; light signifies
happiness and good times. Thus cheerfulness of countenance signifies
gladness, as it is said in the 38th Psalm, v. 11: \"The light of mine
eyes is not with me.\" As he therefore said above Cap. 5, 8: \"He maketh
dark night of the day,\" so he also says here that the sun will set in
the middle of the day (what he calls \"the bright day\"), when the sun
shines brightest and is clear, that is, when the kingdom will be in the
highest bloom, when the greatest security will be there, then you will
all set, not suspecting anything of the kind. You will be lifted high,
so that you will do an even harder fall, as God does with all the
wicked. And while they believe nothing less than that they will perish,
then the Lord seeks them out and brings them to ruin by His judgment.
And this is what Paul says 1 Thess. 5, 3: \"When they shall say, There
is peace, there is no danger; then destruction shall quickly overtake
them.\" Jerome transfers this to the time of Christ\'s passion; but the
circumstances and context of the text do not allow this to be done if
accurate insight is taken. 3)

1\) Instead of the following, D. has: just as the Nile floods horribly,
so I will bring about, as it were, a flood of sin upon this people, that
they may be scattered among the Gentiles 2c.

2\) D. 1: therefore it must be understood figuratively.

3\) D. f: For the prophet immediately interprets himself \[v. 10.\]: \"I
will turn your holidays\*) into mourning.\" But this does not prevent
this whole passage from being referred to the last calamity of the
people, which occurred after Christ appeared, and in which they are
still today. For in this way, I have said, the general rejection of the
people is proclaimed here.

\*) all editions wrong: LLzrtivitatos, for which after
theVuligata:/\"ÄiEate\" should be read.

**V. 10. I will bring the sackcloth over all the loins.**

This was the custom of the Hebrews, that when they mourned and were in
great distress, they clothed themselves with sackcloth, in order to
indicate by the outward clothing the inward sadness and distress of the
heart; not as if it were necessary to do this, but this was their
custom. Therefore Christ says in the 69th Psalm, v. 12, that he had put
on sackcloth, that is, that he was full of sorrow 2c. It is the same
with the shaving of the head, as we also, when we are in tribulation,
are in the habit of plucking out our hair.

**A mourning, as one has over some son.**

He indicates that the captivity will be a perpetual one, that they will
never be returned. He took the simile from the mourning of a mother over
an only son. A mother\'s grief is exceedingly intense when her only son
has died and there is no hope of having children again. - 4) Instead of
novissima, it should more correctly read: her descendants.

**V. 11. Behold, the time is coming when I will send a famine into the
land.**

As this is the last punishment, it is also the greatest and most
miserable. All the other punishments would still be bearable, but this
one is quite terrifying, namely since he threatens that he will take
away the right prophets and the right word of God, so that there should
be no one to preach, even if the people wanted to hear the word with the
highest eagerness, 5) and run here and there, which is the

4\) This sentence is missing in D.

5\) Instead of the few words that still follow in this sentence, D. has
the following longer execution: For in other misfortunes, however great
they may be, the hearts can still, if the word is there, be nipped with
comfort. But when the word is taken away, there is no comfort, no hope
left, but only sadness, despair and death. But the Jews, in the former
calamities of captivity and servitude, always had prophets who
strengthened the fainthearted hearts and raised and stirred them to the
expectation of the future Christ, who should put an end, not to temporal
calamity, but to eternal, eternal death.

1762 L. XXV, 488-47\". Interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
25S0-25S8. 1763

Jews in the Assyrian and also in the last captivity ividerfahren.
Therefore, we must pray and watch lest the same hunger be sent to us,
while we are now showered in many ways with the fullness of the Word of
God by the grace of God, lest, when it is taken away again, palpable
darkness and the most horrible errors be sent, so that, although we
would like to hear the Word, there is no one to preach it, as happened
with the Jews, Greeks and Romans, who had the Word of God superfluous.
For if the word is gone, what is left but the most horrible darkness of
human reason, which wants to be a master and can teach nothing but the
doctrines of the devil? For what else should darkness preach but
darkness and error? There is no other light than through faith in the
Word. And after that happens what the prophet adds here:

V. 12: **That they go back and forth, from one sea to another.**

That is, they will run here and there in search of the Word and will not
find it. We have experienced this more than enough before the word has
come to light again by God\'s grace. Hence come these innumerable sects
of monks: one has become a Carthusian, another a Franciscan; another has
taken yet another state by which he thought to please God; but there was
no peace of conscience; one has run to Rome, another to St. James.
Therefore, we should be grateful to God now and use this priceless gift
rightly, so that we do not again, after it has been taken away from us
as ingrates, fall into greater errors than ever before, and, while we
now live in silk, must again lie in dung, as Jeremiah says in the
Lamentations, Cap. 4, 5. For

and hell: but in the end, since Christ had now come, and they would not
receive and acknowledge Him as the Messiah, they are deprived of the
word, and this hunger continues to this day, so that Israel is blinded,
as Paul says \[Rom. 11:25.\]. Therefore we must pray 2c.

What else have we eaten before the gospel is brought to light but the
dung of the pope, to the detriment of our goods and our souls? But we
are ungrateful. 1) The princes continue to be people like Midas, to whom
it belongs to stimulate and support the studies of learned people. Here
they should apply great costs so that the word and right studies would
be taught abundantly, since they have previously given an immense amount
of money to the servants of Satan; but here no one listens. We preach to
deaf ears. If we continue to be such people, the same judgment will come
upon us that the prophet threatens here. This begins almost already by
the godless prophets 2) 2c.

V. 13. **At that time beautiful virgins and young men will pine away
because of thirst.**

Here is the fruit of this terrible hunger, as if he wanted to say: There
will be many beautiful and lovely virgins, there will be many excellent
young men, but all of them will go limp and perish, so that none of them
will be of any use. That is, the excellent youth will perish, who, if
they had been instructed and raised in the word of God, could have
served the community. They could have taught others and governed the
community properly with God\'s help, but because the word of God has
been taken away, they perish, led astray; they are of no use 2c. What
else have our universities been in the whole world but murder pits for
the best 3) young men, who, while they were being taught by

1\) D. continues thus: and the princes, but especially the bishops, to
whom the care is incumbent to promote the church, do not care about the
holy studies. For while they should enrich and maintain the studies of
learned men, and spend great expense that the word and right studies be
abundantly taught, since they have previously given an immense amount of
money to the servants of Satan, those who are the best either follow
their pleasures and neglect the church, or they rage cruelly against the
good teachers and devastate the church. If we now continue 2c.

2\) D.: the godless and raving teachers.

3\) Here D. continues until the second last sentence in this section:
\"Heads and a corruption of the youth? not only because there was a
great licentiousness in vices, that is the least of it, but because no
wholesome teaching.

**1764 XXV, 470-472.** interpretation of Amos (I), cap. 8, 13. 14. 9, 1.
**W. VI, 2SS3-2S56. 1765**

were sent by their parents to learn godliness, so that they too could
preside over the community, learned nothing but to drink profusely, to
fornicate, and, immersed in all godlessness and crudeness, became
corrupt. Thus, even the best minds perished through this ungodly nature.
The same fruit also came out of the monasteries. Thus, we must
necessarily grope about in broad daylight like a blind man in darkness,
if we do not have the Word of God by which we are governed and
enlightened.

V. 14: **Those who now swear by the curse** (**in delicto) of Samaria.**

That is, at the idol in Samaria. He calls the worship of human reason,
which is performed without the word of God, beautiful.

The study of godliness was overwhelmed with annoying, useless and
pernicious sophistries, which hindered the good minds and prevented them
from bearing fruit. The same 2c.

The fact that the worship of the devil is a sin (delictum) indicates
that they did not want to worship the devil, but the true God. For they
thought, as we said above, that they were pleasing God by this worship,
since they had done it in honor of the true God and not the idols. But
because they thus associated GOt with the service they had devised
themselves, about which they had no word from GOt, and thought that they
would thereby please GOt, it was an abomination to GOt. All the works of
our monks and ministers were also like this. See above. 1)

1\) Instead of this passage, D. (also the Hallic manuscript in the
margin): What the Latin translator has given by delietuin, that reads in
Hebrew: Curse, imprecations, blasphemy. But he calls the idol so;
because they worshipped it, and left the right worship, they deserved
the wrath of God and the curse. But this must be applied generally to
all ungodly worship, which reason devises to propitiate God, while there
is no word of God. For God is not only not worshipped and reconciled in
this way, but is provoked to plague more, to increase wrath and to heap
punishment, as we see in other passages of the prophets.

**The ninth chapter.**

The last two chapters, as I have said, deal with the final destruction
of the entire kingdom and the priesthood. 2) The previous chapter
actually contains the destruction of the kingdom, this last one actually
has the downfall of the priesthood in mind, as we will see in the
vision.

**V. 1. strike the knob so that the posts quake. 3)**

This face contains that the pommel is to be struck; by this striking the
posts will crack. This is in summa:

2\) The following sentence reads in D.: Therefore, someone may, if he
wants, divide in such a way that the preceding chapter actually refers
to the destruction of the kingdom, this last one actually to the
downfall of the priesthood.

3\) Only so far D. has the cue, while our template continues: et seeuit
(vel seidit) eos in cupite vrnnes (vei ornniurn) et retiquurn eorurn
ete.

I will break the priesthood and take it away completely along with the
kingdom and everything that is left of the people. After the kingdom and
the priesthood have been destroyed, the people will wander around the
whole world. They will have no permanent dwelling place where they can
stay; they will always have no permanent place, which he indicates by
the shaking of the posts. \[4) When the knob is struck, that is, when
the head is taken away, as he says here, that is, when the kingdom and
the priesthood are completely gone. 5) This figure of speech is
everywhere in the prophets,

4\) Added by us.

5\) D. leaves this sentence and puts instead as a new keyword (as we
think, incorrectly): \"Their avarice shall come upon their heads\"
(\^varitia in espits ornniurn).

1766 **L. XXV, 472-474. interpretations on the prophets. W. VI,
2556-2ÜS8.** 1767

as in the 68th Psalm, v. 22: \"God will bruise the head of his enemies,
along with the skull of their hair, who continue in their sin.\" The
same is in the fourth chapter of Habakkuk, v. 13: \"Thou shalt bruise
the head of the house of the wicked, and shalt strip the foundation even
to the neck.\" All this means in sum that the kingdom and the priesthood
shall be taken from them, as also Christ says, Matth. 21, 43. For what
are the Jews who are still alive today but a miserable trunk without a
head? For they are miserably scattered over the whole world, having no
fixed abode and no kingdom and priesthood 2c. And this hitting the knob
4) he interprets himself, since he immediately adds:

**For their avarice shall come upon their heads (Scidit eos in capite).
2)**

\"He hath broken them in the head,\" that is, he will take away the
kingdom and the priesthood. But the shaking or the moving of the posts
he lays out quite abundantly with many words, in what follows: \"I will
slay their descendants with the sword, that none shall escape, nor any
escape.\"

**V. 2. And if they immediately buried themselves in hell 2c.**

This is to be understood as an assumed case (potentialiter), as we also
use to speak in the same way. It indicates that they will not be safe
anywhere, wherever they may flee, just as Moses threatened them in the
most terrifying way, Deut. 28, 66. f.: \"That your life will float
before you. Night and day you will fear, and dei-

1\) Here D. continues so: \"and the quaking or the movement of the posts
he lays out very richly in what follows.\" Then he puts as a keyword:
\"Novissirrm (that is, their descendants) I will strangle with the
sword, that none shall escape, nor some escape. And even if they are
buried in hell.\" The following passage he leaves out, and then adds the
interpretation of v. 2.

2\) To understand the following interpretation it should be noted that
Luther here takes the word Zt\^3 in the meaning: to smash, to break
(seinäo), while later, in our Bible translation, he has given it by
\"their avarice,\" from \^3, the unjust gain, as does the Vulgate.

You will not be sure of your life. In the morning you will say: Oh, that
I might live to see the evening\" 2c. We see the same here in all the
pieces.

**V. 4. I will keep my eyes upon them for disaster.**

That is, I will diligently watch over them to do them harm, to destroy
them, not to do them good. Hereby he gives the reason why they will not
be able to escape, namely because, he says, they have the Lord against
them, the almighty God and the creator of all creatures, whom no one can
deceive, whom no one can escape, before whose glory all creatures must
tremble. Therefore, they cannot escape his wrath. And so he holds out to
them the divine power and majesty, since he says:

**V. 5. for the LORD of hosts is such: when he touches a land 2c.**

As if he wanted to say: In vain you hope that you will escape.

**V. 6. He founds his tabernacle (fasciculum suum) on the earth.**

It is the same word which is translated 1 Sam. 10, 10. thus: \"Behold,
there came to meet him a heap (cuneus) of prophets.\" Also in Genesis it
is translated by the word fasciculus, as 2 Mos. 12, 22.: \"Tunket 3) a
bunch Ysopen.\" Some want that the connection (colligantiam) of the
elements is meant by this, but I like Jerome\'s opinion better; as if he
wanted to say: The Lord dwells and sojourns in heaven, and yet he has
his Hansen, his people, that is, his church on earth, which he protects.
For he has established it most firmly, so that the devil cannot
overpower it. 4) But if someone

3\) In D.: iun\^its instead of:

4\) Instead of the last sentence, D. has: Although I do not disapprove
of this view, it seems to me that it would be more appropriate to take
\"heaven\" as in the Gospel for the church and the kingdom of Christ, so
that the opinion would be: The Lord arranges his palace in heaven, that
is, he reigns in the church through the Gospel and free grace, in the
most extensive and free way. But the \"earth\" is, as it were, a bundle
or a kind of prison, in which he is kept as in a bundle.

1768 L. XXV, 474-477.Interpretation of Amos (1.), Cap. 9, 6-9. W. Vl,
2558-2562. 1769

wants to follow a different opinion, he may do so for all I care.

**V. 7. Are you children of Israel not like the Moors to me?**

1\) The prophet anticipates an objection and answers her question
implicitly, as we have also abundantly spoken of this matter in the
fifth chapter above, when he says \[v. 14.\]: \"So shall the LORD God of
hosts be with you, as ye boast.\" Therefore the summa of this whole
passage is: there is no respect of person with God, as if he wanted to
say: it is nothing that you boast that you are the people of God, that
the LORD has chosen you for his own 2) before all the peoples of the
earth, as it is written in Moses \[2 Mos. 19, 5\], because you do not
keep the covenant of the LORD, you shall be taken out of the land, and
everyone who has sinned shall be guilty of the LORD, whether he be an
Israelite or an Egyptian. It will not do you any good to protect your
wickedness with the promises of God that have been given to you. They do
not belong to you, since you do not believe the word of God, but are
godless. So also Peter says Apost. 10, 34. f.: \"Now I know with truth
that God does not look at the person, but at all people, whoever fears
Him and does right is pleasing to Him. As if he wanted to say: He looks
at those who fear him and keep his word, but the despisers he corrupts,
whoever they may be, whether Jews or Egyptians or Moors. 3)

The first and greatest, the preservation of the church through the word;
the other, the preservation of the worldly regime through laws and
punishments. For in both, the power of God is demonstrated to the
highest degree.

1\) The beginning of this passage reads with D.: Some take this passage
in such a way that this is as it were a refutation, which answers to the
thoughts of the Jews: why then they should be rejected, since they have
nevertheless so many promises, so that the opinion is: it will profit
you nothing that you are Jews, because it is no respect of the person
2c.

2\) D.: populum instead of: peeulium in the manuscript.

3\) D. f: But I will not follow this opinion. Because it seems the
prophet threatens them the ruin by the example of other nations: as I by

**V. 8. Behold, the eyes of the LORD look upon a sinful kingdom.**

Here we see quite clearly that the Lord transfers the kingdoms from one
to the other, and arouses one nation against the other, 4) that it makes
itself tributary to the same, and someone else overthrows the kingdom
and seizes it. Thus he let the extremely powerful Roman Empire perish,
and crude peoples, who completely despised the Romans, gained the upper
hand through the victory. He does the same with all kingdoms that he
wants to destroy, as he says here: \"The eyes of the Lord look upon a
sinful kingdom\", as if he wanted to say, whichever kingdom it may be;
as he himself tells here the examples of the change of the kingdoms, of
the Egyptians, the Philistines and the Syrians from Kir. For it is not
right, as we have widely said above in the first chapter \[v. 5.\],
\[instead of Kir\^ Cyrene is read.

**Though I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the
LORD.**

This is what we talked about above in the third and fourth chapters of
the others that have been preserved. For the prophets have this custom,
that after the threat they also add a consolation, for the sake of the
godly. So the opinion is: even though the whole kingdom, the whole
priesthood will perish, I will still preserve a remnant for myself, so
that they will not all perish, 5) as Isaiah also says \[Is. 10, 22. Rom.
9, 27.\]: \"If the number of the children of Israel would be like the
sand on the sea, the rest will be saved.\"

**V. 9. But behold, I will command, and cause the house of Israel to be
sifted 6) among all the nations.**

I have driven out the Canaanites from you, the Syrians from the
Assyrians, the Philistines from Caphtor, and many other neighboring
nations from the Moors because of their sins. So will I also drive you
out by the Romans for your sins.

4\) The rest of this sentence is missing from D.

5\) D. f: there will be some few who believe the gospel and will be
saved.

6\) In the Vulgate: oonoutiam; in our original: llutars kaeiam - rütteln
lassen. The Zwickau manuscript erroneously offers \"intui-s, which both
the Erlangen and dre Weimarsche have recorded there.

1770 L. XXV, 477-47S. Interpretations on the Prophets. W. Vl. 2SS2-2SS4.
1771

This is the clear interpretation of all the preceding. I, he says, will
command; since I will it, it must be done; I will disturb the whole
house of Israel. 1)

**I will have it sifted (nutare) among all the Gentiles.**

It indicates \[nutare\] a movement, 2) as it was, according to
Scripture, on Cain, and how some people have quivering heads at times.
It is the same thing that Hosea says, Cap. 9, 3) 17: \"They must go
astray among the Gentiles.\" He explains by a very hard simile how he
will shake Israel, namely like this:

**And the grains shall not fall to the ground.**

Lyra says, it is here a Hebrew way of speaking, so that the opinion is:
It shall not fall to the prophets also One word in vain, which should
not be fulfilled, by following the passage 1 Sam. 3, 19: \"There fell
none among all his words to the earth.\" But this does not please me,
but according to my opinion this seems to be the opinion, as if he
wanted to say: I will make the house of Israel so sift and tremble, 4)
that not even one grain shall fall to the earth, that is, that no one
can escape this movement, no one will fall out of the sieve; no one will
be completely delivered, who has come into this my sieve. We see this
also today with the Jews. Now I have no better up-

1\) This entire section is missing from D.

2\) From here to the end of the passage, D. has only the words: \"as it
takes place when grain is purified with a sieve.\" The rest D. has
omitted probably because in Luther\'s interpretations about the first
book of Moses it is expressly testified that \"the quaking of Cain\" is
not found in the Scriptures. Compare Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. I,
374, § 231 and Vol. Ill, 120, s 44.

3\) In our template: eap. 10.

4\) Here D. continues in such a way: that nevertheless the little
grains, that is, the good ones are preserved, and only the dust, that
is, the godless and bad Jews fall to the earth and perish. For I explain
the word which means a little stone (lapillum) by \"little grain.\" And
this is a very appropriate and comforting sense, that although God seems
to expect common danger for the good and the wicked, He nevertheless
takes care of the godly, preserves and protects them. So far, the
disturbance of all Israel has been spoken of, now follows 2c.

version than this. Up to now the objection of the prophet lasted, which
was raised against the fact that all Israel should be disturbed. Now
follows a glorious passage of the kingdom of Christ, who will restore
the despised kingdom of David and lead Israel back into eternal
security, namely spiritually through the preaching of the gospel of
faith 5) 2c.

**V.11. In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David, which is
fallen down.**

This passage is cited in Acts Cap. 15, 16. The summa of it is: After the
kingdom and the priesthood have been destroyed, I will gather and
rebuild the tabernacle of David, which was in ruins, 6) and there will
come into it people from all the Gentiles who will believe, even though
they are not of the house of David. This passage, as I have said, is
actually to be understood before the kingdom of Christ. By \"the
tabernacle of David\" understand the people of David themselves, the
descendants of David, \"the 7) tribe of David\", as also Isaiah Cap.
11, 1. on this opinion says: \"There shall arise a rod from the tribe of
Jesse\", that is, the kingdom of David, over which the Messiah was to
rule, 8) had been completely despised and had almost fallen away and had
ceased when Christ came. Barely the lowest yeast was left, it was as it
were a stifled stem; it did not blossom, it had fallen away, it was
broken; but when Christ came, it was revived: it blossomed the dead
root, and brought forth the most beautiful blossoms and fruits;
everything is renewed and restored, all fractures are healed, and
everything has become exceedingly beautiful. It is an extraordinarily
sweet and beautiful prophecy that he said: out of your completely
despised tribe of Judah, which was almost completely destroyed, he will
build a glorious church of the elect, full of grace and full of the Holy
Spirit, 9) which is made glorious by the Spirit. Penn he speaks of the
splendor of the Spirit, in which-

5\) D.: of grace.

6\) D. instead of: \"which has decayed\": which has become miserably
wavering and has, as it were, decayed,

7\) In our template: \"dem\".

8\) D.: But he calls it a root, because it was quite despised 2c.

9\) The following words of this sentence are missing in D.

[1772 D XXV, 479-481. interpretation of Amos (I), cap. d, 11-14. w. VI,
25S4-25K7. 1773]{.underline}

chem also the whole kingdom of David was ruled, because it had princes
who were full of the Holy Spirit 2c.

**V. 12: That they might possess the remnant of Edom.**

That is, not only the Jews will be in this tabernacle, but also the rest
of Edom and all the Gentiles who will believe the gospel. 1) A
wonderful, lovely prophecy. In Hebrew everything is said far more
beautifully.

**V. 13: That one will till and reap at the same time.**

This is a wonderful transformation in this kingdom, that the harvest
will immediately follow the plowing; so great, he says, will be the
speed, so quickly will he establish and renew this kingdom, that every
man will be amazed that plowing and harvesting will be done at the same
time. He indicates the exceedingly fast course of the word of the gospel
among the Gentiles, as if he wanted to say: so fast will the word of God
progress among the Gentiles, that they will at the same time be
converted from sins and bear fruit, believing at the same time with the
Jews, who have long since been tilled and taught. The same is seen in
Joel Cap. 2 - \"The mountains\" are the apostles and proclaimers of the
word.

**V. 14: For I will turn the prison of my people Israel.**

1\) D. t: But notice, as he has only the remnant of no people in this
kingdom, so also only the remnant of Edom and the Gentiles accept the
gospel. For the greatest part of the Gentiles either despises the gospel
or persecutes it, as the word of Christ states Matth. 11, 5.): \"The
poor have the gospel preached to them\"; likewise \[Ps. 74, 21.j: \"The
poor and miserable praise your name.\"

He is talking about spiritual repatriation and conversion, because he
threatened above that he would deliver them all to prison. By this
repatriation, all those who believed the gospel when Christ came were
brought back and placed in the tabernacle of David by faith, in which is
the highest security, peace and joy of conscience; those who are in it
bear abundant fruit. From then on they will not be taken away for
eternity, since they are fortified by faith and by the Holy Spirit given
to them from heaven. Moses always commanded to do, and it was not done;
therefore the promises were made to them in vain. But because here the
Lord himself promises that he will do it, that he will bring back, that
he will plant, therefore it will be firm and certain, 3) they will not
be snatched away 2c.

End. Praise be to Christ. 1525.

2\) D. t: decayed and therefore despised.

3\) D. s with omission of the last words: But here many things are
signified. First, which would be the firstfruits of the church, namely,
the rest of Jacob, that is, the apostles. Secondly, what a glorious
spread this kingdom would have, namely that the Gentiles would be
converted to the faith through the apostles. The divine mercy is
therefore gloriously praised to us, that we Gentiles, who are deserted
and desolate cities, even (as it is said in Luc. 14, 23. We who are in
the fields outside the cities, without law, without worship, without
good works, full of sins, worthy of eternal death, will also be
cultivated by the word of grace, so that we will become lovely and
lovely vineyards and gardens in the sight of God and the angels, from
which other gardens will be planted and prepared as from fertile plants,
so that the glory and the kingdom of God will also be spread and
increase through us. Therefore, we should thank God for His
inexhaustible goodness and love towards us, and ask Him that we may be
cultivated in truth in such a way that we please God as lovely gardens,
and that people may enjoy our fruits and be awakened to godliness
through us. Amen. End.

1774 L. XXV, SIS s. Interpretations on the Prophets. 1775

**2. Luther\'s lectures on the prophet Amos,**

according to the Zwickau manuscript.\*)

Held in December 1524 and January 1525, printed in 1884.

Translated from Latin.

**The Prophet Amos.**

I go to this lecture for no other reason than that the Word may dwell
abundantly among us and that God may be praised with hymns and psalms. I
want to help as much as I can so that there is an abundance and richness
of the Word.

^1^) This prophet is a contemporary of Hosea and prophesies against the
same people, against the kingdom of Ephraim, although he does not use
this word, likewise about the same future calamity as Hosea. God uses to
send his prophets beforehand and messengers to convert the hearts of
some when he wants to do something. So also today. Since the desolation
of Israel was imminent, God did not refrain from admonishing the people
and calling them back to Himself; but as it is now, so it was also then
with the word: few are with the same, and those who are despised, are

1\) Luther tied the following introduction to the words of the first
verse, therefore in the original the keyword is already here: Verba,
which is however later wieverholt.

blasphemed, rebuked, ridiculed. Thus the word was ridiculed at that
time, yes, the prophets were killed. Such is the course of the Word. We
see an example of it today. Summa: \[the task of the prophet is\] to
punish the people and to call them to repentance, because of the future
disturbance of the people. He prophesies at a time when everything was
in the highest bloom, which tends to be especially detrimental to the
word 2c. In the \[second\] Book of Kings \[Cap. 14, 25.\] we read of the
happy successes of Jeroboam, who was a great-grandson of Jehu. With this
people \[it went thus\]: the prosperity of their kingdom beguiled them,
as it is said in Proverbs \[Cap. 1, 32.\], \[\"The reprobate\'s
fortune\] killeth them.\" They did not recognize the mercy of GOD, but
remained in their godless nature. They are hopeful. Therefore, he
prophesies at a very inauspicious time because they were times of
prosperity 2c. At a time of prosperity they are admonished to be
afflicted, and again 2c.

\*In the first relation of the prophet Joel the necessary information is
given about the things which can serve as introduction to this writing.
Therefore it remains only that we prove here the location of our writing
in the editions. First, the same is printed in the Erlangen edition
opp., tom. XXV, p. 315, then in the Weimar edition, vol. XIII, p. 125. A
translation of it has not been available so far. We translate according
to the Weimar edition.

[1776 L.LLv, 3i6f. Interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 1, 1. 2.
1777]{.underline}

**\[The first chapter.\]**

**V. 1. \[This is what Amos saw (verba,).\]**

Verba, \[the word that means: this is what he saw 1) 2c.

**Who was among the shepherds of Thekoa.**

Below \[Cap. 7, 14.\] he says to Amaziah: \"I am not a prophet\", that
is, he was not of the lineage and status of the prophets. See the saying
in Jeremiah \[Cap. 18, 18.\] of the different ranks of priests and
prophets: \"The priests cannot err in the law, the wise cannot fail in
counsel, and the prophets cannot teach unrighteously.\" Therefore,
whoever lies against these prophets is of the devil. And therefore the
people were governed by these priestly and prophetic estates, as now the
doctors \[govern\] the universities. The hopefulness of these people
\[was subdued by GOD\]. To prove His contempt for them, He raised up
simple peasants, like this prophet. Then the prophets, priests and sages
condemn \[him\]: 2) \"This is a shameful thing\", that a man dares to
stand up against the whole class of priests 2c. By God\'s command he is
thrust into extraordinary dangers 2c. Both the prophet and God seem to
be foolish. \"What is the appearance of this\" 2c.? You cannot imagine
what reasons they used against him 2c. Therefore he is not ashamed to
call himself a shepherd. This word \[in Hebrew\] denotes one who has
many flocks, although he is not a shepherd. The king of Moab had many
cattle, that is, he was among the lords over cattle. \"At Thekoa,\" a
hamlet in the tribe of Judah near Betz, 3) \"in the wilderness of Man.\"
A small place, a small person, a small word. This is God\'s work,

1\) Instead is to be read with the Altenburg handwriting viäit.

2\) Inserted by us instead of \"6th\".

3\) Bet?, maybe Bethlehem? - \"Man\", maybe Maon?

that he makes the wise into fools and \"chooses what is foolish in the
sight of the world\" \[1 Cor. 1:27\]. Israel was flourishing at that
time and Jeroboam was a happy king. This happiness was the reason why
people did not believe.

**Two years before the earthquake.**

Of this earthquake we have nothing in the holy scriptures \[ that made
us certain about the time\]. 5) Much is no longer extant. 6) Of this
earthquake the scripture testifies in Zechariah \[Cap. 14, 5.\] that
there was an earthquake under \[Uzziah,\] the king of Judah. In which
year the earthquake happened \[the scripture does not say\]. Uzziah was
struck with leprosy 2c. \[2 Chron. 26, 19. f.\] The interpretations say
that God, because He was angry, caused the earthquake at that time. That
earthquake was a sign of future calamity, as it always tends to be. GOD
does not desist from foreshadowing His signs 2c. It was a sign of the
future calamity.

V. 2. **The LORD will roar out of Zion.**

This is the subject of the whole prophecy and especially of this
chapter. So it is also said in Joel \[Cap. 3, 20.). It is a metaphor or
rather an allegory. When a lion roars, he shakes his manes, he seeks
prey. This is a threat of wrath: the LORD makes known out of Zion a
great displeasure. \"Beware, \[he\] shaketh the comb.\" Tonabit, \"dohnt
und schreiet,\" should be instead of \[vocem\], dabit \[in the Vulgate).
He speaks of GOD who dwells, that is, the LORD who dwells in Zion, and
has his dwelling place in Zion, who will make his voice heard and roar.
Although this LORD is despised by Israel, he will use the teeth and the
yoke of the king of the Assyrians, \"will devour you; beware!\" He wants
to say what he will do.

4\) Instead of srissrs, the Vulgate reads sliMro.

5\) Without this addition, which is taken from the Alteuburg manuscript,
there would be a complete contradiction in this section.

6\) Compare the previous relation.

[1778 u- xxv. 3i7-3is. Interpretations on the prophets.
1779]{.underline}

**That the pastures of the shepherds will stand miserable, and Carmel
above will wither.**

\"The floodplains will stand miserable.\" Above are the same words in
Joel \[Cap. 1, 10.). - \[Instead of: Luxerunt speciosa pastorum, et
exsiccatus est vertex Carmeli in the Vulgate) is to be read thus:
Lugebunt habitacula pastorum et exsiccabitur caput Carmeli, that is, he
will make the land a wasteland, so that where there are now shepherds
there shall be a desert and sadness, without cities, without
inhabitants, without worship. \"Neither eating nor drinking\" will be
there, that is, there will be deserts, in figurative speech. \"Carmel\"
is famous for its fruit and fertility; there the herds of Judah\'s
cattle will be pastured. I assume here the \[Mount Carmel\], which is on
the shore of the western sea. That is, this mountain will be made a
desert and will not be worked, whereas now it is a mountain that bears
fruit, is very fertile, and gives exceedingly abundant yield; it is wide
and spacious, has fields, arable land, country houses 2c. These are
images and similes. Under the dwellings of the shepherds \[he
understands\] the lowest classes of men, and under the summit of Carmel
the nobles. That is, such a great fall and desolation is at hand that
everything, both the lowest and the highest, \"rich and mighty \[and\]
poor must perish.\" The minor prophets use more imagery than the major
ones. Now he lays out which are the peaks of Carmel and which are the
dwellings of the shepherds, saying:

**Thus saith the LORD; For three and four vices of Damascus will I not
spare them, because they have threshed Gilead with the tines of iron.**

Instead of: \[tribus sceleribus\] it should rather read: propter tres
praevaricationes. - Tribulum ferreum, \"a flail,\" a toothed tool with
which: Wheat, grain, \"fodder shoulder, 1) Heckerling\", the fodder for
the draught cattle, is threshed with a toothed flail 2c. whereby the
fruits are crushed. - Et devorabit \[v. 4.) should be et devoret. -
Cyrene \[v. 5.) should be:

1\) In the original: \"futterschutter\". Perhaps as much as bulk straw,
long straw to feed, fodder heaps.

\"gen Kir\". Cyrene is in Africa, which the Assyrian never seized.

This passage of the \"three vices\" has been acted in many ways. Lyra
means that by the \"four\" \[vices\] the sins are understood which are
hardly forgiven. Jerome is even more inconsistent here. The prophet
mentions one sin, which he attributes to Damascus, that he threshed 2c.
It is foolish that one plays his game in such a way and refers it to
sins, that one calls the sins by name. Likewise they make four sins. But
I say, it is a figurative speech and a way of speaking in Scripture.
Read 3 Mos. 26, 18. 21. 24. He names here only One sin, as also in the
third book of Moses \[only One sin is named\]. That is: and I will give
you a barren land, and this punishment he calls a sevenfold 2c. That he
will send the wild beasts and lay them waste 2c. \[3 Mos. 26, 22.\], is
a plague. Thus he seems to me to call the one sin a sevenfold sin; there
is nothing in the fact that he divides it. This number \[\"seven\")
indicates the perfection: all around \[I will destroy you\]. I will
smite you, I will not cease, but let my plagues go to the end. It
indicates perfection: They have sinned in this way, that they persisted
and did not recognize their sin; and just as they have sinned in the
highest degree (rotunda), so I will not cease to smite them because of
their unceasing transgression, as they are fierce and complete (rotunda)
with sins 2c. Judah has forsaken the whole word and transgressed the
statutes 2c., and yet he says: a sevenfold. The number \"seven\" refers
to the strength, duration and persistence of sin.

**That they threshed Gilead with iron prongs.**

He wants to say: Damascus has threshed this land, that is, crushed it
and made it completely nothing. He speaks figuratively: as by the flail
the fodder \[is crushed\], so it has crushed this land by the war, so
that \"animals run through it\".

**I don\'t want to spare theirs.**

\[I\] \"will let him \[, the Assyrian,\] go\" 2c.

1780 **L- XXV. 31S-321.** interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 1, 4-6. 1781

V. 4. **I will send a fire.**

He indicates, as it were, as a general plague, the devastation of the
Assyrian: \"I will kindle a fire, you shall see it,\" which devastates
everything. \"A fire,\" that is, the king of Assyria. \"Hasael\" was
exceedingly hostile to the land of Gilead. I will put despondency in
their heart, that their strong ones cannot protect themselves.

**V. 5. and will break the bars of Damascus.**

\"The bars,\" that is, the walls and the defenders, that they cannot
defend themselves. - \[Disperdam in the Vulgate is as much as\] I will
tear them out, 1) I will exterminate them, I will kill them, I will
exterminate them. Damascus is situated in a plain. The tender
inhabitants, \"I will lift them out of the beautiful floodplain,\" I
will make them be taken away from the fertile place. - \"In the field\":
in the plain.

**Aden.**

That is, of ungodliness. This is what idolatry is called in the Hebrew
language. \"Aven\" is complaint, \"toil and labor\" 2c. It is applied to
all the undertakings of ungodliness with which ungodly men labor 2c.
Damascus is a very prosperous and very lovely city, but it serves idols.

**Eradicate from the pleasure house the one who holds the scepter.**

\"He who holds the scepter\" is a circumlocution, that is, the king who
holds the kingdom, \"him I will cast\" \"from the pleasure house,\" or
2) from the castle in which he has his pleasure, I will take him away
2c. Benhadad 4) or Benhadar. This is the first roar in particular 2c.
\"He will go through it with his head\" 2c.

1\) svsllarn cannot be keyword here because it is not in the Vulgate,
but is an explanatory word to äispsräaru. The Weimarsche has highlighted
it instead of eoutkram m the Vulgate and has drawn it with to the
preceding V66t6w, while it belongs to ttakitatorsru.

2\) Instead of \[sä, We have accepted \[su.

3\) Both in the Erlanger and in the Weimarschen: Lsu-

**V. 6. For the sake of three and four vices Gasa.**

The prophet says that God will frighten all the nations around by his
roar. In the midst of these lands the kingdom of Israel has its seat. He
roars at the surrounding countries. The Scriptures contain nothing about
what this history is. This land was even contentious and unconquered.
The land was set under five governors. A small tribe (natio) of
Philistines, like \"counts\" under \"princes\". It indicates that the
inhabitants of Gasa captured some Israelites in battle and handed them
over to the Edomites 2c. All these pagans have made enemies of Israel. I
have put them in the midst, namely Jerusalem, says the Psalm. Israel
could not destroy all the surrounding Gentiles, but neither could these
destroy Israel 2c. Gasa was not the first among the cities of the
Philistines, although at that time 1) God wants to punish that sin
sevenfold with fire, that is, with the kingdom of the Assyrians.

**\[Therefore, that they have continued to imprison the captives and to
drive them out into the land of Edom\]. 5)**

Concludere \[resolve\] is as much as the verb \"to deliver over,\" as it
is usually translated, \"The LORD has resolved your enemies into your 6)
hand. \"2c.

So it is said in the \[first\] book of Samuelis \[Cap. 26, 8.\]; that
is, that he gives (tradere) the enemy 7) into his hand. Here trälleret
is better than concluderet 2c. - Eo quod transtulerint \[captivitatem\]
is a Hebrew way of speaking. As he called \"the captives\" a captivity
(captivitatem), so Zechariah 8) says. \[Cap. 6, 10.\] transmigrationem;
here captivitatem. \[In Hebrew it says:\] 9) Eo quod transmigrare
fecerunt transmigratio-.

4\) Here, the Weimar after yuaiuvis tun\" has a punctum, which would
require us to assume a gap here.

5\) Vulgate: Lo huoä traustulsruut eaptivitatsru psrksetaw, ut
eouducksrsut saiu in läuluasa.

6\) Instead of 8UL8, the Vulgate reads tuas.

7\) Instead of iniluies in the Weimar, and iuiruieis in the Erlanger,
either iuiiuieuru is to be read according to the Vulgate or iuiruieos
according to the preceding text.

8\> The Erlanger offers: in Natttt. That which the Weimarsche asked in
the text: in Ratturn, is corrected on the last page of the volume.

9\) This addition is according to the Hall manuscript.

1782 K- xxv, 321-323. interpretations on the prophets. 1783

nem perfectam, while we call it captivitatem, yes, \"captives,\" that
is, those who have been led as captives into edomitic 1) captivity. This
is a common way of speaking: captivitatem captivare, transmigrationem
transmigrare. - Perfectam. By making this captivity a complete one, that
is, a final one (consummatam), they have left nothing. This is how
Jerome interprets it; but I do not understand it that way. It is said,
They are so fervent and have such a hostile heart that they cannot talk
out their vengeance with words 2c. In Ezekiel \[Cap. 25, 15.\] the
Philistines are punished because of their vengeance 2c. All these
heathen were against Israel, which had the word of GOD. And today those
who seek vengeance because of the word burn with an exceedingly hot and
bitter desire 2c.

V. 7. **This shall consume their palaces.**

\"Their palaces\", their inhabitants) that is the citizens.

V. 8. **and turn my hand against Akron** (**convertam**).

Convertam is as much as vertam. This was done by the king of the
Assyrians.

V. 9. **To three and four vices of the city of Zor.**

Eo quod: because she has handed over. - Instead of fratrum it should be
fraterni. - The Tyrians had been in agreement with the Philistines
concerning the same total Edomite captivity, perfectam, that is,
plenam. - \"The covenant\" is that which King Solomon made with Hiram,
that they call one another brethren, as appears from the first book of
Kings \[Cap. 9, 13.\] They are called brothers in harmony. The Tyrians,
who raged without cause, broke and dissolved this covenant; they
completely surrendered these captives of the people of Israel.

1\) In our original: in oaptivitatsru Lad\^lonieam. According to the
Erlangen edition in the original: in ean: Ladi. - We hold that the last
word has been read out and must be assumed instead Läom or länrnasaln,
which we again encounter in the interpretation of v. 9: in \"andern
eaptivitatsrn Idnrnaearn pertsotam.

2\) Uaditatorern is highlighted as a keyword by the Weimar edition, but
it is not.

**V. 10. \[But I will send a fire\].**

Et mittam is as much as: therefore I will send.

**V. 11. For the sake of three and four vices of Edom.**

Here 3) St. Jerome seems to me to snore. - \"His brother,\" that is, the
Israelites. - \[Instead of: Et Violaverit\] misericordiam \[ejus, as
Jerome translated it, should be:\] perdidit viscera sua, he deserted
them, the Israelites. The word viscera occurs frequently in the New
Testament; it cannot be rendered by a German word. Viscera is a big
word. One should be the other\'s viscera, \"heart.\" The mother
cherishes the fruit; it means the mother (matricem) 2c. Therefore he
says, He that should cherish his brother hath corrupted and delivered
him up. And his anger has raged without end, and he keeps his wrath
forever, that is, it has been an irreconcilable raging of the brother
against Israel; from Esau it began, and has propagated. The hatred
between brothers is extremely bitter.

**V. 12: I will send a fire to Theman.**

\"Theman\" is twofold. Theman is the grandson of Esau of, Eliphaz \[Gen.
36, 11.\], from whom the whole land of the Edomites has its name, as in
the Psalms Egypt \[also\] Mizraim 2c. \[is called\]. Soon the land is
called Edom after the grandfather, soon Theman after the grandson. As an
appellative, Theman means the south. The inhabitants of Theman have been
praised very much because of their wisdom, in Job \[Cap. 6, 19.\]

**\[This shall consume the palaces at Bazra.\]**

\"Bazra\" \[means appellatively\] munita, \"firm.\" \"A fire,\" that is,
the devastator, the king of Assyria.

**V. 13. For the sake of three and four vices of the children of
Ammon.**

\[Dissecare is\] scindere, \[they\] \"tear from each other\" \"the
pregnant\"; Other: the

3\) We think that instead of \"viäsr\" we should read \"vidvtnr\". The
manuscript reads \"8. kisro\", which the Weimar edition has
inappropriately rendered as \"8. hisron\^w\". For how should Luther come
to address Jerome here?

1784 L. XXV. 3W-W. Interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 1, 13-15. 2, 1-4.
1785

mountains. But this does not rhyme; it is more trouble than gain to rend
the mountains, I like \"the pregnant ones,\" for XXXX is not XXXX, which
means mountains, in figurative speech cities rich, well-built, and
glorious. \[\"They tore them\"\] only \"that they might continue their
border,\" or actually the women of that tribe, which was near these
heathen 2c. It was in the manner of this people of Ammon to invade the
land of Israel. See the history of Jephthah \[Judges 11:4 ff\]. They did
not desist as long as Ammonites were there. Therefore they did not cease
to make their border further.

V. 14. **Within the walls of Rabbah.**

\[Instead of\] in muro \[it should read: in\] muris. Every country will
have its capital

given: Jerusalem, Shechem, Rabbah, Zela or Bazra, Damascus in the
kingdom of Syria, against which the prophets roar and cry. - are
\"palaces\".

**When one will call.**

In ululatu, under the shouting of the victors or the enemies; \"whoop\"
means the word. In commotionis, \"at the time of the storm\". It is a
description of the war that is raging.

V. 15 **Then their king will be led away captive.**

As every country has its own city, so also its own god; they had
Milchon. - Instead of Melchom \[in the Vulgate\], it should read,
\"their king.\" This happened in the time of the king of Assyria.

**The second chapter.**

**V. 1. l\^Therefore they have burned the bones of the king of Edom to
ashes\].**

\[Instead of\] incendere \[it should be comburere, for in Hebrew\] the
verbum \"means\" \"to burn altogether.\"

**V. 2. \[But I will send a fire into Moab, and it shall consume the
palaces of Kirioth; and Moab shall die in tumult, and in shouting, and
in sound of trumpets\].**

Carioth, better: cities, appellative. I do not like here the fables of
the Jews of Moab that it burned \[the bones of the king of Edom\] to
ashes and dug them out of the grave 2c. I would rather take it
figuratively. This rural prophet is full of imagery. \"Issachar is a
legged ass\" \[Gen. 49:14.\], that is, a strong one; and the strong
bones, that is, his princes and mighty and strong ones, he has burned
2c. He punishes that it has avenged itself with such great lust; this
sin GOD cannot suffer. A wonderful GOtt, that he judges among the
heathen. God seeks out all the heathen, so that

He is the God of the whole world, both of the Gentiles and the Jews. He
punishes one people by the other 2c. It is not by chance 2c. - In sonitu
is as much as \"in the tumult\", as \"outside\" on the sea the storms,
and the winds in the trees roar. - \"In trumpet reverberation,\" in
shouting and under the sound of the trumpet, or in rejoicing. All this
the king of the Assyrians will do. Now he passes over to Judah and
chiefly to Israel. \"There he abideth.\"

**V. 4. \[Therefore, that they despise the law of the LORD, and do not
keep his statutes, and are deceived by their lies, which their fathers
followed\].**

Abjecerit, \"it \[namely Judah\] despises\". The prophets punish nothing
so much in the people as that they do not keep what they should keep and
\"do\". Here you see that one sin contains many 2c. -\[Instead of
mandatum it should be statutum,\] a commandment, an order that can be
changed with time 2c. Thus it is said in the second Psalm, v. 7:

1786 L. **XXV, 325 s.** Interpretations on the prophets. 1787

I will preach a constant right of God 1). This people always remains on
its sense, \"therefore I will let them go as they go\"; I will not spare
them 2c. - Idola should mean \"lies.\" The cause is this, because they
stick to the lies of their fathers, just as our \[papists\] stick to the
fathers. - Abierant, \"they have followed\".

V. 5. **This shall consume the palaces of Jerusalem.**

Aedes is palaces. - So far he has made a digression, and now he comes to
the actual prophecy, which he has undertaken against Israel. 2)

V. 6. **For three and four of Israel\'s vices I will not spare them,
because they sell the righteous for money and the poor for a pair of
shoes.**

Against Israel he has similar sins as those which are sins before
others, which he also calls sevenfold, because they happen continuously
and persistently, \"are called shoes\", that is, they reject
righteousness 3) altogether. Ezekiel says \[Cap. 13, 19.\]: \"For the
sake of a handful 4) of bread\"; \"he would take a piece of three\" and
betray the prince. These are the cowardly people who would sell and
betray righteousness for the sake of some cause, \[\"for money\"\]
\"one\", the other \"for a pair of shoes\". They are afraid to approach
justice. This is very disgracefully spoken; that is, they do not judge
righteously, as honor requires, \"strike\" righteousness and the
righteous \"to the wind\" 2c.

V. 7. **They tread the head of the poor in dung.**

\[Instead of: Qui conterunt super pulverem, it should be In pulverem or
ad \[pulverem ab-.

1\) Instead of \[1 in our original-is to be read either Dei, according
to the Altenburg manuscript, or Hus according to the Vulgate.

2\) Here it is probably better to read espid with the Erlanger than
eospiti with the Weimarschen.

3\) In the Weimarschen: iniustitiarn instead of justitiarn; probably a
printing error.

4\) What the Weimarsche here from the: Texts of the Bible inserted,
korckei 6t tra\^M6n, seems to us deliberately omitted for the sake of
the following German phrase: \"er nem ein stuck drei\" (so. Brode).

sorbent. He uses a verb that means to devour, that is, they make the
poor nothing at all, as the dust is. They do not do justice to the
fatherless or the widow; they condemn them for the sake of the great or
according to favor. Above in Hosea it says \[Cap. 4, 1.\]: \"There is no
faithfulness in the land\", as our princes \[nowadays also the common
people \[bring\] into\] 5) destitution or poverty. - \"And hinder the
way of the wretched.\" Declinently, they pervert, pervert, namely, the
cause of the poor. They corrupt the ways of the same and direct them to
their own advantage. Their tyranny and avarice go beyond all measure;
their lechery is beyond all measure: so brazenly do they commit
fornication that in open incest father and son ravish one and the same
girl. This could easily happen among the Jewish people. - So that they
profane my holy name.\" Ungodly life is a blasphemy of God. The name of
GOD has been invoked over lins. \[By whatever names GOtt is called,\] 6)
with these names we also are glorified. And yet the devil reigns among
us 2c.

**V. 8 They drink wine in the house of their gods (in domo Dei sui) from
those they have prayed for.**

\"And wine from the penitents\", from the penalty, from any penance
(mulcta). They unjustly force to pay any amount that is unjustly taken,
that is, they tyrannize freely, not only against the people, but also
against the sanctuaries, because it was not allowed to \[drink wine\] in
the temple. They lived quite brazenly, taking no account of shame or
fear of God. - \"Wine,\" that is, they took the unrighteous fines from
which they bought wine to live deliciously on. So they made cushions of
the garments, that they might sit there in the temple of GOD in
splendor, as the lords. This he says to make the thing great. In the law
both were forbidden: simple indulgence and what you read in the 5th book
of Moses \[Cap. 24, 12. f.\] about the pledge that one should not keep
it during the night\];

5\) Supplemented by us according to the Haitian manuscript.

6\) Supplemented by us according to the Altenburg manuscript.

1788 **L. XXV, 326-328.** interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 2, 8-14.
1789

But they kept it not only through the night, but for ever. He makes
their sins great and heavy: from what they had robbed from the poor,
from the repentance of the unjustly condemned, they drank wine \[on\]
\"seats with baste bandages.\" 1) But what is it that he says, \"In the
temple of GOD,\" since the temple was not in Israel but in Judah? This
he should have praised \[ that they defiled the temple of the calves\].
A godless heart sins in a godless way. Notice in Dionysius \[ that he\]
consecrated his beard \[to the gods, but) took away the golden gifts
\[from the image of Jupiter\]. 2) He would have done the same at the
right worship and at the right temple. The deities \[*numina*\] should
not be despised but feared (by those who worship them), although the
devil would be worshipped 2c. The godless are godless also in their
worship. In their ungodly nature, even today the monks act ungodly, who
have sworn poverty and are the very richest, have sworn chastity and are
the very unchaste.

Threefold is the wickedness in the temple of God 2c. Now God is bringing
upon them the benefits that were shown to Israel.

**V. 9. I destroyed its fruit above and its root below.**

Contrivi, I have exterminated. That is, I have exterminated the small
and the great, the princes and the people. I have not left them seed;
\"with root, with all,\" both the roots and the fruit I have destroyed,
above and below.

**V. 10. I have led you in the wilderness.**

This is an advancement of his good deeds: so you repay me.

**V. 11. \[And have raised up prophets from among your children, and
Nazarites from among your young men\].**

1\) In the original: \"sit with basten binden\". By \"basten binden\"
will be understood carpets. The Hallic manuscript offers: pulviimridus
6t tap6tis ex vestimentis piMoratieiis emptis sauf Polstern und
Teppichen, die für die verpfändeten Kleiver gekauft\^.

2\) Compare Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. II, 923, § 57.

(\"Prophets\" and) \"Nazarites\"; Samson and the judges, who were
prophets who ruled the people. I have not only brought you in (to the
land), but have also given you judges, that you might be preserved.

**V. 12. 3) So you give (the Nazarenes) wine to drink.**

Deut. 6, 3. The Nazarites are forbidden to drink wine. 4) \[They made
the Nazarenes unholy and the prophets would not let them be prophets\].
They could not suffer them to prophesy against them. Otherwise they
would have been able to suffer it, \"here we cannot suffer it\". In the
following chapter 2c.

**V. 13. Behold, I will make it foolish among you.**

\[Instead of foeno in the Vulgate it should\] rather be \"sheaves\"
(read). As a chariot groans, 5) which is full of sheaves; \[the load\]
makes the chariot groan; so will I make you groan under the chariot
which I will harness by the king of the Assyrians. I will burden you,
\"will load full\" 2c.; in whatever place you may be, \"you shall be
under it.\" Ye shall lie under the feet of \[the king of\] the
Assyrians, and he shall overcome. Under him ye shall groan, but in vain;
there shall be none to deliver you.

**V. 14. That he who is swift shall not escape.**

He takes away protection: I will take away all protection and strength.
In the Psalm \[142, 5. Vulg.\] it says: \"The escape has gone to ruin
from me\" \[, that is\], the hope is lost. 6) \"He who is swift\" will
not be able to escape, and \"the strong one\" will not be able to do
anything in the fight by his strength, 7) by his powers.

3\) Here the Weimar edition has no new verse number, but the Erlangen
has it in the margin.

4\) Here follows a sentence m our original, which we cannot make sense
of: tune ernt peeeatum yuamvis nune iäso üie 68t ä6lietum, quoä
pror\>Ü6tAV6runt. What we have inserted instead, according to the Hallic
manuscript.

5\) Instead of \"geit\", which both the Erlangen and Weimar editions
offer, Mmit will read what is found in the Altenburg manuscript.

6\) Already here, the verse number \"15.\" is found in the Weimar
edition.

7\) For roko in the original we assumed rodoi-6, the Erlanger and the
Weimarsche: rodorutus.

1790 L. XXV, 328 f. Interpretations on the Prophets. 1791

**V. 15. \[And the archers shall not stand\].**

\[Tenens arcum 1) in the Vulgate\] is \"a bowman\", arcitenens. I will
send fear among you and attack you with the forces of others, so that
you will not be able to stand. - \[Ascensor equi, that is,\] \"he who
rides.\" 2)

1\) This should have been highlighted in the editions as the keyword,
not saAittarius, which is an explanatory word.

2\) The explanatory word syuss is prefixed in the editions to the
following section as a keyword. In the Weimar edition without verse
number: ani-

mosus 2c.

**V. 16. sAnd he that is most manly among the strong shall have to flee
naked at that time\].**

The most courageous among the fighters will escape naked, \"the ensign\"
or leader. Whose heart was like that of a lion, his heart will be so
despondent at that time that he will flee away naked. \"There fight the
devil\" where the enemy is strong, the heart despondent. This is the war
of God, that he first takes the heart and \"makes it faint\"; it fears a
child and a woman 2c.

**The third chapter.**

This is another sermon. Hardly once in a year have the previous sermons
been collected like this. The summa is this: Annoyed by the previous
sermon, they accuse the prophet of nonsense. If God is with us, why do
you bark and threaten us with evil? The happiness of the kings was the
occasion that they believed that GOD was against them like a father;
therefore, they did not believe \[the prophets\' threats\]. Therefore,
the prophet is forced to raise again, and he confirms the previous
sermon as if to say, I admit that 2c. but you hold this against me, that
I should not punish you. The excuse that you make, I take as an
accusation against you.

**V. 2 \[Out of all the generations on earth I alone have known you\].**

\"He has recognized\", that is, he has been present. With emphasis he
says: \"recognize\" 2c. First, GOD begins to strike His own, as here. We
see this in Ezekiel \[Cap. 9, 6.\] and Peter \[1 Ep. 4, 17.\]. You think
that I do not have to punish you 2c. I will punish you all the more,
because you are my little children. \[One is in the habit of \"beating
the little dogs\" \[, so that the big ones

Fear dogs\]. 3)-\"Therefore I will punish you in all your iniquity,\" 4)
as if to say, You want to be righteous, but I will accuse you and punish
your iniquity, and call it an iniquity.

**V. 3. \[Even if two walk together, they will be one with each other?**

Pariter is as much as \"with each other\" (simul). 5) - \"They are then
one\" (convenerit) or: one knows the other. This seems to me to be a
spprüchwörtlicher text; I take it in a negative way. The opinion
(scopus) of this chapter is: Two cannot walk with each other if they are
not in one accord. The application of the proverb is: GOD

3\) Added by us according to the Altenburg manuscript; in the original
only: \"klein hundel schlagen\". These words are missing in the
Erlanger.

4\) In the Weimar: Iniyuitutis, for which, according to the Vulgate,
Iniczuitatos should be read, and this should have been emphasized as a
keyword.

5\) In our original we find: Limite: pariter, immediately following v.
2. Limite cannot be the keyword, but xariter should have been
emphasized. Instead of simite, we have assumed simut, which is found in
the explanation immediately following as well as in the Hallische and
Altenburger manuscripts instead of xariter. If the reading 81 with6 were
correct, the translation would read: It is a simile: \"with each
other\".

1792 D **XXV, 3M-33I.** Interpretation of Amos (2.), cap. 3, 3-9. 1793

and the people are these two, as if to say: Already from this you can
see that it is nothing, because we do not agree with each other. You
want to be unpunished, I cannot be other than just, \[we\] \"must be one
in the matter. If I am to spare, \"you must be pious\". You are not
innocent; I would not accuse you if you were just.

V. 4. **Does a lion roar in the forest when it has no prey?**

This goes to the same thing; he makes it big. A full lion does not roar;
when he sees prey, he roars and shakes his manes. 1) I would not roar
like this if you were not godless; therefore do not defend your
godlessness. Job says \[Cap. 6, 5.): \"The game \[does not scream when
it has grass\"). If you were righteous, I too would be content with your
life, I would not roar. Thus Job says: \"You have shouted well\", I sit
in death.

**V. 5. 2) \[Does a bird also fall into the rope?) (Numquid.)**

What follows is the same, and wants to say that they are sinners 2c.
\"Were I content with you, I would such\" 2c. Not a righteous life, but
iniquity is punished. \"Hunting day, feasting day.\" Any day is a day
for hunting, but not for catching. The prophet has the intention \[of
the fowler) in mind, not the work. The net is set to catch; the king of
Assyria \"shall be\" the net, the evil. I will not set the rope and the
net in vain, \"that I may see,\" because you are evil.

**V. 6: Do they also blow the trumpet in a city? (Si clanget.)**

As soon as \[one\] \"tempest beats, the people are up; \[it means\] fire
or enemies.\" Instead of si \[in the Vulgate\] it should read numquid.
\[\"Bläset man auch\" 2c.,\] that is, he convicts the people of being
smitten by the righteousness of the Lord: you need not excuse your sin,
he sends the evil because of sin 2c.

1 ) In the Hall manuscript suMm. instead of iudarn.

2\) The verse numbers \"5.\" and \"6.\" are missing in the Weimar
edition, and \"7.\" is set where \"6.\" should be.

**V. 7 \[For the Lord does nothing, but reveals his secret to the
prophets, his servants.**

The Lord always predicts the evil, before it is to happen, through his
prophets; the word always precedes the calamity. If it does not happen
through a prophet, then \[this rumor comes out\] among the people,
without it being possible to trace it back to a certain originator. Thus
I have heard that \[before the revelation of the Gospel\] 3) it was
said: This time indicates a great change of things.

**V. 8. The lion roars.**

This is the conclusion of the previous one. The lion will not stop
roaring. God has commanded it, he wants to confirm his previous
preaching by these things 2c. He preaches against those who had
justified themselves.

**V. 9. Proclaim in the palaces of Ashdod.**

Insanias, that is, the riches, the unjust mammon. - As if he wanted to
say: You see the Gentiles, who are all around. \[Say to them:\] Gather
yourselves unto us \[and see) whether we may be compared unto you. Thus
it is said in Isaiah \[Cap. 1, 9.\] and Jeremiah \[Cap. 23, 14.) and
Ezekiel \[Cap. 16, 48. 1: \"Sodom has not done as you have done\" 2c.
\[, your wickedness\] has increased 2c. To shame the Jews, he compares
the Gentiles to the people of GOD. \"As we also are\": if our vices are
to be compared with those of the Turks, we are worse 2c. - \"Ashdod\" is
in the land of the Philistines, where Gentiles are. - \"The mountains of
Samaria\" are the kingdom of Israel.- Insanias \[\"great clamor\"), the
many unrighteous good (mammon). As if to say: here is no administration
of justice, there is no end in the possession of riches, in the heaping
up of treasures 2c. on the part of the rich who oppress the poor. The
poor are oppressed. He punishes tyranny 2c. as all the prophets do:
\"That only you may become rich.\" \[He punishes\] the abundance of the
many tyrants.

3\) Supplemented according to the Hall manuscript.

[1794 L. xxv, 33i f. Interpretations on the prophets. 1795]{.underline}

**V. 10. They do not respect any rights.**

So much is lacking in their being just: they are like cattle and know
not what is right. The right \[they take\] \"straight for
themselves.\" - \"Robbery,\" that is, desolation; iniquitatem^1^ )
\[inequity\], that is, injustice, \"iniquity,\" that is, they gather
their riches with injustice, like tyrants. \"He who is able \[, puts the
other in the sack\"\]. The disturbance of the\' people who are among
them; these are disturbed by them so that they become rich. A
description of the tyranny.

**V. 11. They will besiege this land all around.**

Tribulabitur \[et circuietur, that is\], undique, from all sides. You
plunder the possessions of the poor and devastate everything. With what
you sin, with that you will be punished. \[You will escape the judgment
of GOD nothing), namely by the Assyrian. - Fortitudo is \"power.\" The
Psalm states: I once heard 2c. But you are his LORD. \"Ye great
houses.\" This power \[I will tread in\] \"filth,\" that thou mayest
cease to oppress the poor 2c.

**V. 12: As a shepherd snatches two knees or the lobe of an ear from the
lion\'s mouth.**

The Spirit is not angry in a human way; \[His anger is\] not like a
human anger that wants to completely eradicate Christ, like \[the
Jews\]. God does not strike in such a way that an unregenerate remains
unharmed. He threatens here that he wants to destroy everything, he
presents the accident that will occur 2c. Everything will be devastated
so that hardly a survivor will be saved. This is how it will be with the
death of each one: it will seem as if

1\) The words ravlnas andsollten , like

we recognize from the Hallic manuscript are highlighted as keywords. Dw
Weimarsche has: rspinss, vsstitatvm, ini\^uitatsra, injurias.

2\) It seems to us that instead of illis either iüi should be read or
from Mi8.

3\) WoN us supplemented according to the Altenburg manuscript.

whether God will devour everything 2c. Isaiah speaks of the grape
harvest and the vineyard 2c., but this farmer speaks of a thing taken
from the shepherd\'s life. It is a hard threat that the shepherd shall
save only a cartilage 2c. \"Two knees\", since everything else is
devoured.

**And have in the corner a bed and to Damascus a sponde.**

They shall be disturbed. I will destroy most of the children of Israel,
but still some remnants shall remain. Remnants always remained in
Israel; both in punishment and in guilt, the godly always turned to the
temple in Jerusalem 2c. \[Vulg.:\] \"In the corner of the bed, and in
the camp at Damascus.\" \[This refers\] to the tribe of Judah. The
kingdom of Israel he calls a bed. \[In this bed,\] that is, in this
peaceful kingdom) That is, the whole bed will perish, but One in the
little bed will still be preserved. I will see to it that one part is
preserved while the others perish. \[I want to keep \"a little place 5)
of it\". This opinion pleases me, because the thing happened in this
way; the people are distraught, the remains are preserved. Now he sums
it up and concludes the chapter.

V. 13 **Hear and testify in the house of Jacob.**

He explains what his opinion is of the bed and the donation 2c. \"Ei,
how beautifully they have decorated themselves!\" They have special
summer houses, also special winter houses. \"Have a good courage\", but
the time will come when all this will be destroyed \"to the devil
away\". He turns his prophecy against Israel.

4\) Correctly mapped by us according to the Altenburg manuscript. Our
Vorläge offers i.\". in Ists xaeiLoo /eoko fstatt

5\) \"Place\" \-- the extreme end.

[1796 **L. XXV, 333 f.** Interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 4, 1-3.
1797]{.underline}

**The fourth chapter.**

Confringitis, you crush. Instead of in sancto it should read per sanctum
suum \[\"by his sanctuary\"), aperturas, \"gaps\". XXXXXX

\[, \"gen Harmon\"). 1) He seems to me to punish the women, because one
sees how this sex puffs itself up. At the time of the bloom of the
kingdom there is great splendor of dress. Is. 3, 16. says something
similar about the daughters and wives of the high priests, the priests
and the rulers, who lived on the sweat of the poor in the most
delicious, XXX (Barra), \"a young strong cow\".

**V. 1. You fat cows.**

That is, you rich, powerful \[women\]. You do injustice to the poor, you
are insatiable, and are the cause of that drudgery for your husbands.
The women, as the weaker ones, are not to be satiated, \"the devil
cannot adorn them enough.\" \"The masters,\" are their husbands.
\[Instead of bibemus it should be) epulemur, \[let us\] \"live well.\"
You are the cause of all unhappiness. If you want to live like this, the
Lord will send the \"slaughterer\", the Assyrian, namely \"he shall
slaughter\" these young cows.

**V. 2 \[The Lord has sworn in His holiness: \"Behold, the time is
coming for you to be brought out with fishing rods (in contis) and your
descendants with fish skins (in ollis ferventibus).**

Per sanctum, that is, by itself. - Contus, a rod, a spit. \"You will be
carried away\" on poles. It is a boorish image: \"to carry away on
poles, 2) to pull off slippers,\" that is, you will be led as prisoners
to Assyria. \[3) the rest: maids, daughters, the offspring, the house is
on the flesh and

1\) In the editions: aperturaa, ruptura\", H\"-\'-nowa. - Luther
anticipated here several glosses on the first three verses.

2\) In the Erlangen and Weimar languages: \"bey tragen\", but soon
after: \"beg tragen\", which is to carry away. We have also assumed the
latter here.

3\) Correctly supplemented in the Weimar.

the offspring of the \[\"fat\] cows\" 2c. \"You will be carried away
with poles\", the rest will be carried away \"in fish kettles\" - the
fish are used to be cooked with a hotter fire in a pot or fish kettle -,
\[it will be\] \"carried away in pots\", that is, you will be disturbed,
\[you will be\[ \"slaughtered, roasted and boiled\".

**V. 3.^4^ ) \[And will go out to the gaps.\]**

Not on the right road one will go out, but through the gaps of the
walls. Ps. 17, 4: \"In the way of the murderer\" (grassatores), \"who
does not stay on the right road\". He will take away the walls and
\"chase one here out, \[one\] there out; to the window, to the hole\"
2c., \"one before the other.\" The king will have no regard for dignity,
\[he will drive you\] out like \"cows\" 2c. - 5) History must serve us
as a guide to the meaning. The kingdom of Israel has been taken away to
Media and Assyria. \"Harmon\" stands for the name of a city in Assyria,
as above \[Cap. 1, 5.) \"Kir\" is named for Syria sas the place whither
the people are to be led away\]. 6) \[It is not Armenia or the name of a
mountain, but) XXXXXX (Armona) indicates much

more to a place.

4\) The Weimar edition does not have a new verse number here (the number
\"3.\" is missing entirely), but the following is attached to v. 2.
without distinction.

5\) The following words to Hai-mona are drawn in the editions to the
preceding, but we consider that they must be connected, as the Altenburg
manuscript has done, with the next keyword Harrnona.

6\) In the Weimar one we find: ut 8upra l\^r pro 8\^ria. The Erlanger
offers: ut 8vpra l\^bi \[sic ll in 8\^ria. We have, to give some sense,
put \"Kir,\" for which the Altenburg manuscript gives 6ir, but the
Vulgate gives 6vrono, rejected by Luther. In our writing, Cap. 9, 7.
both spellings occur, l\^r and Lir. - The following is also added
according to the Altenburg manuscript.

1798 V xxv, 334-33\". Interpretations on the Prophets. .. 1799

**V. 4. Yes, come to Bethel.**

He returns again to the whole people. Gilgal and Bethel had \"the great
pens,\" as if to say, \"The more I preach, the more you do.\" We want to
heal our sins and get into a greater sin. A fool goes the opposite way
2c. \"Come\" is a word of one who bitterly concedes, not of one who
commands. He wants to condemn very strongly, because he scolds by a
bitter concession: If you did not do it before, do it even more now!
Behold, he condemns these things as ungodliness. \"Away, away! will make
good play\" 2c. You compete with Judah according to the law. Lyra filled
me here: Three times in the year ye come together that ye may worship
according to the law 2c., and ye appear not empty. The service, which is
performed in the best opinion, is a godlessness and a transgression,
because it is without faith; on the other hand God is not worshipped,
but mocked.

**V. 5. and burn incense from the leaven for the sacrifice of
thanksgiving.**

\[Laudem, that is,) kindle sacrifice of praise, sacrifice 2c. There are
different kinds of sacrifices: \"grain offering, drink offering, burnt
offering.\" Likewise, the voluntary sacrifice, the vow offering. The
sacrifices of praise, which were for thanksgiving, \[were among those,)
which were acceptable to the priests, \"waxed rich therefrom.\"
\[Instead of sacrificate it should read incendite). 1) To set on fire
\[\"to burn incense\") is a Levitical word. Some things were burned:
bones and entrails; oil, wine. The use of salt is forbidden in the law,
lest a leaven arise in the sacrifice of God; pure breadcrumbs 2c. The
prophet sanctions the leavened crust: you offer baked goods with the
rest of the sacrifices and \"preach about voluntary sacrifices\". Always
the word \"preach\" is given by vocare in the \[Latin\] translation.
\"Voluntary offerings\" \[are those\], from

1\) Inserted by us according to the Altenburg and Hall manuscripts. - In
the Weimar edition, the words iuetzucltzrb and prasäiunrichtig are
highlighted as keywords in your following. The same are rather
explanatory words for kNeriSears and vooars.

which Moses writes; it is a word of the law. Voluntary 2) is not what we
have chosen, but \"voluntary\" \[is as much as\] \"willing\". 3) The
\[119th\] Psalm \[says v. 108th\], \"Pleasing to thee, O Lord, the
willing offering of my mouth\" 2c. - \[Annunciate is as much as\]
auditas facite, \"let it be made loud.\" Voluistis This is:\] . \"so you
like it\"; the LORD did not command it, but you like it so; therefore
the LORD hates it and will persecute it 2c.

V. 6. **For this reason I have also given you idle teeth (stuporem
dentium) in all your cities.**

Oefter you have been beaten. \"It does not help; the devil has led you
to Bethel and Gilgal\" 2c. \"I must once even overthrow\" 2c.-Purity of
teeth \[in Hebrew\] is a circumlocution for hunger: \"pious, innocent
teeth, do no harm to bread, stand idle, are pious, must suffer hunger,
are pure.\" Stuporem is as much as idleness 2c. When there was famine,
they said: We did not worship enough at Bethel. So we made processions.
There was famine, but you did not return to me, but to Bethel. Since you
were beaten, you should have come to me in faith, but you turned to even
greater wickedness.

V. 7. \[**Also I have restrained the rain upon you 2c.\]**

If no rain falls around Pentecost, it is evil 2c. - \[\"A field (pars)
was sprinkled.\"\] Pars \[a part\[s, rather a field. From the Austheilen
\[in\[ \"Hufen\" (huffen) is called in Hebrew the field a Theil
(portio).

2\) In the original: 8po\", which the Erlangen edition has added to the
preceding: sponstnneus). The Weimar edition, on the other hand, has
connected it with the following and has put sponstansa) in agreement
with voluutaria Ps. 119, 108. We consider it best to read sponbausinn. -
In the psalm citation that follows immediately, both editions offer:
beNtzkao instead of b \"u6xlaoita kao. The Erlanger hak the same aoris
instead of oris.

3\) In the original: spon vo, which the Erlanger \"\"has left
supplemented. The Weimar one offers: sponstansumf voWe have assumed:
8x\>onta \"688 voluntAria\"\"o. odlation68l, which is confirmed by the
Psalm word.

1800 L. xxv, 33 \"f. Interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 4, 8-13. 1801

**V. 8. \[And two, three cities moved to One city.)**

Venerunt, they have been afflicted, et non, and yet not. Venerunt
\[\"they wandered\" in Hebrew is as much as:) they wavered \[from
thirst\] 2c., \"yet it did not help\"; you did not run to me, but to
Bethel.

**V. 9. I afflicted you with dry times and with burnt grains.**

\"Heat, drought, bleaching\" (pleych) are damage to the grain from the
heat of the sun. By multitudinem \"all that grew in your gardens 2c.\")
he denotes the whole quantity of fruits. \"What grows in the
countryside\" in abundance, I beat with fire; in the gardens, in the fig
tree plantations, the caterpillar has eaten away \[everything\]. \"I
smite as I will,\" I cannot turn \[you\] to me and away from Bethel.

**V. 10.^1^ ) I sent pestilence among you.**

We do not know this history; but he tells only of a pestilence that was
deadly, \[connected\] with captivity. Both by the pestilence and by
enemies they were killed. \"I caused to stink and to become foul\" 2c.,
\"have turned all plagues upon you,\" but you run to Bethel 2c.

**V. 11 \[I turned back some of you, as God turned back Sodom and
Gomorrah\].**

Subverti or verti, conjunctive or indicative.-\"Like a fire,\" a
firebrand torn out in the burning down of the whole house. I have so
inverted you that you are a kind of stump of a firebrand 2c. This is the
difference between Sodom and the children of Israel: there nothing was
kept; here A firebrand is kept, as above \[Cap. 3, 12.) was said of the
\"two knees\" 2c. That is, after all the people are distraught, the poor
are left in the land 2c. A firebrand bears the sign that it has been in
the conflagration, so also the people: the poor, having lost the kingdom
and the priesthood. The same fury

1\) This verse number is missing in the Weimar edition.

God applies in the justification of one man than in the destruction of
the whole people 2c. It seems as if he wants to destroy all of them.
This serves to frighten those who are hard and to comfort those who are
troublesome. There will be a small portion left 2c., that is, he is such
a firebrand, thank God that he is not to be all Sodom 2c.

**V. 12 Therefore I will continue to do this to you, Israel.**

As if to say, I use to do this to you, I whom you do not seek and to
whom you do not return; but you go to Bethel and do not turn to me. It
is I who do this, it is I whom you should seek 2c. Therefore, since I do
these things to thee, I do them for this cause, that thou mayest send to
meet me 2c. Since I am in the habit of doing so, be wise, meet me. Step
in front of the crack \[Ezek. 22, 30.) and favor me, that is to raise up
a wall for Israel \[Ezek. 13, 5.). Likewise it is said elsewhere \[Ezek.
22, 31.\] that God pours out His wrath (effundere). So it is found in
the prophets. Isa. s64, 7.): No one has been found to meet \[me\]. This
I willed with these plagues, that thou shouldest oppose me, that I
should not pour out my wrath, that I should not send the Assyrian 2c.
But you flee to Bethel, \"even turn back\" 2c. From me, not from others,
you have \[ that you are struck\], 4) therefore you should meet \[me\]
and send yourself 2c.

**V. 13 For behold, it is he who makes the mountains.**

Something similar is in Isaiah \[Cap. 51, 15. f.\], since he \[the HER\]
attracts the greatness of his 5) majesty: \"I am the HER\", from whom
you cannot easily escape 2c., so that there could not be someone to save
you

2\) Instead of mirum we have assumed murum soppoiwr\^. Both the
Hallische and the Altenburger manuscript have the saying Ezek. 13, 5.

3\) In the editions istis plaZis is drawn to the citation from Isaiah;
in contrast, in the Altenburg manuscript to the following.

4\) Supplemented according to the Altenburg manuscript.

5\) Instead of M6L6 in the editions, the Altenburg manuscript will read
suas.

1802 D- xxv, S37-33S. Interpretations on the Prophets. 1803

would like 2c. Should you not fear such a Lord as I am? He opposes^1^ )
the hardness of their foreheads with the greatness of his majesty. -
effundere, he forms \[\"he makes\"\]. \"The wind, \[that is,\] the
breath. I am he who gives you the breath, and you should not fear me,
from whom you have it that you can breathe, who gives men that they can
speak? This very ability to speak is not in you; if I did not give it,
you could not speak a word, not even a letter. To the hardened neck he
opposes the terror of his majesty, which is so great that even your
breath is in his hand. GOD gives us the breath, the uttering and the
speaking. This text takes away our ability to speak. - The dawn I can
make dark, everything that is great on

1\) Instead of oppouas we have assumed opponit with the Altenburg
manuscript.

of the earth, I trample under foot 2c., as if to say: I could take away
the breath, the speech, the darkness, the light, and yet you do not turn
to me. - \"The mountains\" is all that is great 2c. - \"He maketh the
dawn and the darkness.\" He also plays with secret interpretations. I
can undo the dawn; your happiness I can soon reverse. - \[Excelsa terrae
are\] the high ones; 2) the rulers over the earth I trample underfoot
2c. - Here is another sermon he preached perhaps three or two years
later. The prophet always uses other and other/ words so that they
repent and turn from their false worship to the right worship 2c.

2\) 8ud1iin68 is incorrectly highlighted as a keyword by the Weimar
edition.

3\) The Erlanger reads here alüs \"Hus; the Weimarsche: aliis alias; we
have assumed aliis aiiis.

**The fifth chapter.**

There follows another sermon, preached in a different year, but
containing almost the same thing as the previous sermons. The sermons
are given and collected at different times. So it says Luc. 3,^4^ ) 4.:
\"In the book of the speeches of Isaiah.\"

**V. 1. Hear, you of the house of Israel, this word; for I must make a
lamentation over you. 5)**

It is an urgent exhortation, \[he\] \"means well\" that they may be
converted 2c. - Instead of quod it would be better to say quo. - He
denotes the burden of the word of the LORD here by levo; \[I will lift
up a burden\] \"upon you, lay it upon \[your\] neck.\" This lament shall
be your burden, for he announces the plague of GOD all, which in Isaiah
\[Cap. 13, 1. 15, 1. 2c.\] is \"the burden\" of the LORD; calamity is
announced. This prophet cannot speak of anything else but of

4\) In the editions: Vueae 4. - In the manuscript immediately following:
Voliao instead of klsaiao.

5\) Vulgate: \[.uäito verlrum istuä, Huoä oxo Isvo super vos plauotuva
eto.

Burden, desolation, misfortune, wrath. The flesh does not want to suffer
it, it makes of it \[the word of God\] a burden, as it is, because it
proclaims the wrath of God. - Ego levo, that is, I proclaim to you a
word of burden, I preach a burden, and one that is called a lament 2c.

**V. 2. The virgin Israel has fallen, so that she will not rise again;
she has been knocked to the ground, and there is no one to help her up.
6)**

The virgin Israel is betrothed to God alone, just as we are. Paul says
\[2 Cor. 11, 2\]: \"I have entrusted you to one man\"; one should cling
to God alone 2c. He does not speak of virginity. It is said: it is
destroyed, devastated by the king of the Assyrians; the preterite stands
for the future tense. He is picturing what was future. \[The same was\]
above in Hosea

6\) Vulgata: Voraus Israol oooiäit, et not aäjioiot ut rosui-Zat. VirZo
Israel prosoeta est irr terrara suara, nou est \^ui susoitot eam.

1804 L. XXV. 339-341. interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 5, 2-6. 1805

\[Cap. 1, 6.\] The kingdom of Israel has been so disturbed that it has
not been restored. - Non adjiciet, that is, \"it will not rise
again.\" - Instead of in terram suam would be better: in terra sua. -
Cecidit, that is,\] destruetur, it will lie down distraught, and only a
few will remain.

**V. 3.^1^ ) For thus says the Lord GOD: The city where a thousand go
out shall have only a hundred left 2c.**

\"This is a \'strong\' degumming, when nine are torn away and only the
tenth part remains. It is the same as what he said above \[Cap. 4, 11.)
of the firebrand, but without a picture. This is the burden and the
lament. Now he goes on to the exhortation. You will be cast out and not
restored. Because it now says so,

**Therefore thus saith the LORD unto the house of Israel, Seek me, and
ye shall live.**

See how kindly he addresses them. He always looks to Bethel. \"Me\" who
is prescribed for you through Moses 2c., \"seek.\" To seek God is not as
we seek Him with our works, but with your whole heart, in ashes 2c. If
you will seek me, then you will live. \"Je, how they have life!\"
\"Life\" is to be in well-being,swie) in the Psalm \[142, 6.\], \"In the
land of the living.\" In the Song of Hezekiah \[Isa. 38, 11.: \"In the
land of the living\"\], that is, in the land where all is happy and well
2c. Ps. 22, 30: \"Those who live miserably\" are rather counted among
the dead than among the living. Seek the Lord, and it shall be well with
you; you shall be among the living in the land, and it shall be well
with you 2c.

**V. 5. Do not seek Bethel, and do not come to Gilgal, and do not go to
Beersheba.**

Bethel was \"his \[Israel\'s\] pen\" where \"wept and sang\" 2c.
\"Bethel\" had chosen it for Jacob\'s sake; in \"Gilgal\" Joshua 2) had
pitched camp; in Ber-.

1\) Already here, the Weimar version has the verse number \"4.\" with a
transition from \"3.

2\) Here the Weimar edition offers: \"Oeäeon 7, 3.\^\", the Erlangen
\"Oeä\", but is to be read after Jos. 4, 19. and 5, 10. \^08UU.

seba Abraham stayed, in Thabor \"also\". In memory of the event that a
holy man had been here \[, a service was arranged\]. This is the same
service as we \[in the places where martyrs were killed, and elsewhere,
set up a service that GOD did not command) 3) 2c. God did miracles with
the fathers in these places, but He did not want us to imitate the deeds
of the fathers, but their faith. God wanted them to do this, but He
wants you to do something else 2c. The prophets who contradicted them
were called heretics. If only God wanted us to be able to hang on the
word here on earth with our eyes closed. The prophets only go about
calling back to the word. - \[\"Bethel will become BethAven.\"\] To
Aven, \"toil, labor\". Ps. 90:10: \"It has been toil and labor,\" \"a
weary, unpleasant life.\" It refers to one\'s righteousness by which he
\[false worship) causes tribulation, weighs down the conscience,
troubles, torments, that is, Bethel will become toil and labor. Bethel -
BethAven is a very beautiful play on words. Your ungodliness will pay
you with woe. You have made a fictitious Aven, he \[the HER\] will make
it a right Aven, that is, toil and labor. \"Heartache and misfortune\"
will be had by Bethel.

**V. 6 \[Seek the Lord, and ye shall live; lest there be a fire in the
house of Joseph, and it consume, and there be none to quench it in
Bethel\].**

Lest the house of Joseph be kindled as a fire in Bethel. Lest the Lord
come and kindle a fire in Bethel, and there be none to quench it. Lest
Bethel be the cause \"that the devil should lead you away\" 2c. It is
written about the house of Joseph in the first book of Moses \[Cap. 48,
13. ff. 49, 22. ff.\]. Ephraim is the royal \[tribe\] (regia \[tribus\])
of Israel; the house of Joseph \[is the kingdom of Israel\] 4) 2c.

3\) Supplemented by us according to the Hall manuscript.

4\) Supplemented according to the Altenburg manuscript. The Hall
manuscript offers: The ten tribes are called Ephraim. (Instead of Mi
read Mas \^tribus\^.)

1806 xxv. 34i-3t3. Interpretations on the prophets. 1807

Ephraim was the son of Joseph. The verbum means: to break in with luck,
which is translated here by comburatur.

**V. 7: You who turn justice into wormwood.**

This word 2) is taken from Moses f5. Book, 29, 18.) in the Law,
\[repeated\] in the Acts of the Apostles \[Cap. 8, 23.\]. In the letter
to the Hebrews \[Cap. 12, 15.), \"A bitter root.\" f5 Mos. 29, 19.:)
\"That the drunken may go with the thirsty.\" He speaks of those who are
very secure in their ways according to their free will, \[who\] \"have
no need\" 2c. You would be exceedingly lovely in the sight of God and
man if you kept the commandments of God, but you pervert them into
wormwood. \"Injustice hurts\" 2c. Again, he contrasts the majesty of GOD
with their harshness.

**V. 8. \[He makes the mother hen (Arcturum) and Orion 2c.)**

Arcturus is the guardian of the bear. Opposite to each other are \"in
the sky \[the\] chariot\" and Orion. That is, God makes and creates
\"the great star\" at midnight and the greater one at noon, \[the\]
\"Jacob\'s Rod\". The outgoing Orion; it is he who makes it to set and
to rise. - \"He who makes the morning out of darkness\" 2c. This is a
paraphrase of night and day; a \"beauric\" metaphor or paraphrase \"from
Thekoa\" 2c. That is, who makes the day and the night and the stars in
the sky. As if to say, Those gods can do none of these things, but he
whom you forsake does all these things. - \"And poureth it upon the
ground,\" that is, he rains. Behold the fullness of the prophet\'s
words. He imitates what is written in Job and in the Psalms \[Ps. 147,
8.), \"He covereth the heavens with clouds.\" The cloudy sky gives rain.
He distinguishes by all these things the right GOtt from the false gods
in Bethel and Gilgal.

**V. 9. He who subdues (subrideth) the strong.**

1\) Luther takes as root word instead of - Following the same, according
to the Vulgate oolndurutur must be read instead of oourduravtur in the
editions.

2\) Instead of V6rt6r6 we have assumed V6rdum.

Instead of subridet it should read roborat fer makes strong). \[So it is
written) Ps. 39:14: \"Depart from me, that I may be refreshed.\" There
is \[also\] this Hebrew word \^3.. He who is refreshed gains 3)
strength, \"gets rid of faintness.\" - \[Instead of super robustum would
be more correct\] super potestatem, that is, kingdom or dominion,
\"power, those \[ who have the\] upper hand,\" the right, the prestige,
and the power, that is, He is GOD; when He is angry with the wicked, He
has power over the dominions, and brings, drives a disturbance over the
fortified, add: cities. \[There\] \"is no city so firm\" that he cannot
destroy it 2c. This one you leave.

**V. 10: But they are angry with him who punishes them in the gate.**

\"In the Tor\" is in the place of assembly, in a gathering of people
where the council holds session. Pas means they hate the prophets who
stand in a public assembly and punish the lords. - \"He that teacheth
wholesomely\" (perfecte loquentem), that is, purely. \[Ps. 119:1:\]
\"Blessed are they that live without change.\" \[\"Wholesome,\" that
is,\] sound doctrine, faith, love f, so Paul interpreted it \[2 Tim. 1,
13.\]). 4) By these things, teaching the same, they served and honored
\[God\]. Now, after the exhortation, he proceeds again to the threat.

**V. 11. Therefore, because you oppress the poor (diripiebatis).**

He complains about the impiety against God and the violence against the
neighbor. f\[Instead of diripere it should more correctly read:) 5)
oppress the poor and lay burdens on them that they cannot bear. You
oppress, you rob the poor with right and wrong, and receive from him
chosen robbery, \[XXXX\] also means burden or booty; \[XX-XXXX\] the
chosen robbery, \"what good he has.\" Everything weighs you down,
\"cows, house.\" The pope, the princes leave nothing untouched; \[it\]
\"must give what there has\" 2c. - \[Quadro lapide, that is, lapidibus\]
excusis \[\"of workpieces\"\], \"with

3\) Instead of rs\^uirit, Wohl should be read aequirit.

4\) Supplemented by us according to the Altenburg manuscript.

5\) Supplemented by us according to the Altenburger Handschirft.

1808 v- xxv, \"43\^45. interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 5, 11-17. 1809

nus-hewn stones\" 2c. For as ye rob, so shall it be robbed from you. -
\[Amantissimas, that is? desideratas, \"beautiful vineyards.\"
Desiderabilia, is often written: \"lovely, beautiful to look at\".

**V. 12 For I know your transgressions, which are many, and your sins,
which are great 2c.**

\"I know\" indicates his \[God\'s\] and her heart\'s movement; as if he
wanted to say: You go along like this, 1) as if I do not know. Thus in
the 10th Psalm \[v. 6.\] the wicked pronounce this opinion. I have taken
heed, with motion of heart I consider it. \"Much\" is \[your
transgression\], while you boast of your righteousness. \"Strong\" \[are
your sins\] because they are harmful. \"By force ye go to it.\" - \"In
the Thor,\" that is, in the public court. Easily the poor are oppressed.
They accept gifts by which they are moved to make unjust judgments and
oppress the poor.

**V. 13 \[Therefore the prudent man kept silent at that time\].**

\"Silence\" here stands for: letting it go, being quiet. Ps. 11, 3:
\"What should the righteous do?\" The wicked \"rumble here\" as if there
were no God in heaven and on earth. What should the righteous do? \"Let
him who is wise keep silence,\" for the wicked reign and have the upper
hand. \"Let go as it goes\" 2c.

**V. 14 Seek good and not evil, that ye may live; and the LORD God of
hosts shall be with you, as ye boast.**

Again he exhorts. - \"That ye may live\": that it may go well with
you. - \[Vulg. \"As ye say,\" that is, \"as ye boast.\" \[The wicked
boast of the Lord:\] \"Hath the hand of the Lord been shortened?\" in
Isaiah \[Cap. 50, 2.\], in Ezekiel, in Micah \[Cap. 2, 7.: \"Thinkest
thou that the spirit of the Lord is\] shortened?\" 2c. Here you see the
struggles of the prophets. Always the wicked boasted that they had a
gracious God because of their good works,

1\) Instead of inesdit in the outputs will read ineoäits.

as the Pope says: God is in our midst. \[It is true,\] \"He will be with
you,\" but you must do otherwise. \"He will gladly be with you for this
purpose, \[for he speaks Mich. 2, 7.? \"I am indeed pious,\" but with
those who walk rightly. Otherwise you will boast in vain.

**V. 15 \[Hate the evil and love the good, establish justice in the
gate, and the LORD God of hosts will be gracious to the rest in
Joseph\].**

\"In the gate\", \"that one judges rightly\" the poor 2c. - \[\"The
rest\"? they are your few, \"God can still preserve you\", but because
you do not hear, this will follow:

**V. 16. 2) \[Therefore, thus says the LORD God of hosts, the LORD:
There will be wailing in all the streets 2c?**

He passes from exhortation to threat. Therefore, because you do not
hear, and the Lord is not with you, as you boast in all the courts, 3) I
will make a lamentation in all the streets. \"Even the husbandman shall
be called to mourn,\" that is, I will make mourning so great that it
shall be in the village also, not only in the city, that there shall not
be a corner where there is not mourning and lamentation, that is, I will
cause a general mourning throughout the land. And everyone, \"what can
only howl, that must howl, young, old, large and small\".

**V. 17. There will be wailing in all the vineyards.**

That is, not only the husbandmen, but also all the vinedressers \[will
lament\]. As I went about in Egypt, and smote all things, so will I
destroy thee, and smite thee, as I did in Egypt. Here is the end of the
exhortation and the teaching; I believe that another sermon follows.

2\) In the Weimar edition, this section is attached to v. 16 without a
verse number and without any distinction.

3\) Here we have omitted the words: ktratis and I. 6. because they are
too much.

1810 L. xxv, 84s f. Interpretations on the Prophets. 1811

**V. 18. 1) More to those who desire the day of the Lord! What is it to
you? For the day of the LORD is darkness, and not light.**

He begins to speak against the stubborn and sure despisers. He attacks
those who said that the prophet was nonsensical, who said, \"Let come\"
the day of the Lord. Here you see how the wicked were minded: It will be
\"a transition\"; after ten years it will be as before. They do not
believe that the future calamity concerns them. Thus, all godless
\"seuffpfaffen (seuff apes) must remain\" in great security. Thus they
\"defy the prophets\" here. As if to say, \"Dear sirs, do not defy him,
he will be too hard for you.\" Night he calls the whole time of
affliction and persecution; day, light, dawn he calls the welfare. \[In
Job and in the Psalms this image is frequent:\] 2) By night his \[the
righteous man\'s\] lamp shall not be put out \[Proverbs 31:18.\], his
light shall shine. \"The day of the LORD\" is just this \[future\]
calamity and not a blissful state, therefore you should not wish for it
2c.

**V. 19 \[As if someone flees from the \"lion\" and a bear meets him,
and as if someone enters a house and leans against the wall with his
hand, and a snake stings him\].**

This is a rebuke against the hard and the scornful 2c. The safe one will
be in danger. As if to say, I will make you flee and be taken in flight.
Persecution will come upon you and persecution will drive you further
into flight. 3) There will be no safety, \[but\] terror 2c. Death \[you
will find\] where you hope for life 2c. \[It will go according to the
proverb:\] Escape from Scylla and get into Charybdis. They do not want
to come to the word, and flee to the princes; \[it\] \"happens right to
them\". Now follows an objection \[, which the prophet refutes).

1\) The verse numbers 18. and 19. are missing in the Weimar edition and
what was said about these two verses is appended to v. 17.

2\) Supplemented according to the Altenburg and Hall manuscripts.

3\) In our prelims: st psrssoutio luxum änkit; we have assumed vos in
iuMm.

**V. 21. 4) \[I am grudging of your feasts and despise them, and do not
like to smell in your assemblies\].**

\"Are we not pious people?\" We sacrifice the fat 2c. \[In the law it is
written 2 Mos. 29, 18. 25.:\] I will smell your sacrifice, done
according to the law, as a sweet smell 2c. All that is done with the
sacrifice he does with one word. Though you do great things, it will not
be a (sweet) smell to me. \"I do not like it.\" He condemns everything
that the wicked do against GOD. \"The sacrifices of the wicked are an
abomination to GOD,\" it says in Proverbs (Cap. 21:27.). These people
had the promises of God for the worship they performed, our \[papists
have nothing of this\]. These services had a very beautiful appearance,
therefore the prophet must have been very spiritual, who recognized that
these things were carnal 2c.

**V. 22 \[Though you offer me burnt offerings and grain offerings, I
have no pleasure in them\].**

Munera \[in the Vulgate\], that is, oblationes, \"grain offering,\"
which the priest offered at the same time as the burnt offerings. - Non
suscipiam \[, that is), in this he will have no pleasure. - \"The peace
offerings\", also of fattened cattle, \"which have been on it\", \"I do
not like to look at\". 5) There was something great about this Boer
prophet that he condemned these glorious and exceedingly apparent
things.

**V. 23. (Thou only away from me the noise of thy songs.)**

Tumultum \[\"the blare\"\], that is, the great crowd. They had many
alternate chants (responsoria), like us. (It) \"none will be right\".
This is the judgment pronounced on their worship. Their pageantry is
condemned. GOD wants to be worshipped in faith, otherwise he will not
2c. - Instead of lyra \[in the Vulgate\] it should be \"psaltery play\".
\"I don\'t like to hear it\" because you are godless.

4\) Here our template has: \"20. sro 6ts\",

but the whole interpretation refers to v. 21, so this verse should have
been placed here as a keyword, as was done in the Altenburg manuscript.

5\) Instead of sussipiani in our original, the Vulgate will read
rsspioiam.

1812 **L. XXV, 346** f. Interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 5\> 24. 25.
1813,

**V. 24. But the law shall be revealed as water.**

According to the way of the prophets, he brings in the kingdom of
Christ, and it is a transition. As if he wanted to say: \"I let you have
misfortune\" through this worship of yours, \[but\] the time will come
2c. He is talking about the future gospel, when justice and
righteousness will be revealed exceedingly abundantly 2c. Among this
people the revelation and public preaching of righteousness has not yet
taken place 2c., as with waters of the departing sea, as it is said in
Isaiah \[Cap. 48, 18.\]. From this reprobate worship the prophet passes
to the right and well-pleasing worship 2c. As if he wanted to say: \"I
am full of your sacrifices\", as it is said in Is. 1, 11. But \"a strong
river\" will be revealed, which no one can resist 2c. The Psalm \[Ps.
40, 7.\] says, \"Sacrifices are not pleasing to thee, but thou hast
opened mine ears.\" Those who want to preach the righteousness of GOD
reject the righteousness of the law. It is all ungodly whatever you do;
it will be another service, another song, another psaltery. 1) When?
when will it be revealed? As a river \"passeth through,\" so nowadays
the word passeth through even where men rage most 2c. Before he preaches
right righteousness, he first rejects the righteousness of works and the
law. In Isaiah \[Cap. 32, 1.\] or rather in the book of Kings 1 Kings,
Cap. 3\] it is said: And there shall be a wise king, and righteousness
upon the earth.

**V. 25.^2^ ) \[Did you of the house of Israel bring me sacrifices and
grain offerings in the wilderness for the forty years? Yes indeed\]**

1\) Here we have adopted the Erlangen reading \"aliuä P8a1 \"st6rium1;
the Weimar reading offers: alius xsalmus.

2\) Here our original reads, \"26. lt portastis.\" But the following
interpretation obviously refers to v. 25.

This passage was quoted by Stephen in the Acts of the Apostles, Cap. 7,
42. f. Lucas followed the translation of the seventy interpreters: \"Did
you also sacrifice\" or offer something to me? 2c. - \[V. 26.\] Sidus is
\"the star.\" - Here the interpreters agonize greatly from 2c. Note the
prophecy of Balaam 4 Mos. 23, 21. 3) It is a synecdoche here. Both are
said of the same people. Ps. 77, 18. \[it is rebuked as an ungodliness
that they demanded food\], 4) in another Psalm \[Ps. 105, 40.\] it is
taken for a praise. There they are condemned because they demanded in an
ungodly way, here they are praised because they asked. There are both
godly and ungodly in the people; the godly he comforts with promises,
the ungodly hearts \[he scares) 5) with threats 2c. Both he speaks to
the whole people and yet 2c. \"Two things\" are in this people 2c. For
the sake of the godly the food came, and the godless were condemned for
the sake of the food. So also here \[namely 4 Mos. 23, 21.). In Jacob
was an idol, and \[with the godly) was not an idol. Paul says of GOD
that he also tolerated the exceedingly vile manner of the people, Apost.
13, 18 or \[Cap.\] 15 \[?\]. He speaks of those who had their idol and
worship. As the fathers did in the wilderness, so do ye, as Stephen says
2c. All outward godliness is condemned, and the righteousness of faith
is commended; the righteousness of works is reproved 2c.

3\) This passage is cited in the Altenburg manuscript, while our
original offers: 24. with which a lot of

the prophecy of the \"star of Jacob\" 4 Mos. 24, 17: could be meant. But
it seems to us more appropriate to regard the words: Ziäus: stküam as a
gloss thrown in between to the 26th verse, and to refer everything that
follows still to the 25th verse, as the Hallic manuscript has done.

4\) Supplemented by us according to the Altenburg manuscript.

5\) This addition is also found in the Weimar edition.

[1814 xxv, 347-3SV. Interpretations on the Prophets. 1815]{.underline}

**The sixth chapter.**

The prophet remains to announce the captivity. He starts something new
all. In the following sermon he summarizes at the same time the two
tribes Judah and Benjamin with the ten tribes. He attacks both kingdoms
and prophesies captivity to them. Ulld he seems to prophesy of the last
captivity, but we want to remain with the simple context and with the
history.

**V. 1. Woe to the proud of Zion, and to those who rely on the mountain
of Samaria, who boast the most noble of the Gentiles, and walk in the
house of Israel.**

Not as if he condemned wealth, but that which is extorted and obtained
from the sweat and toil of the poor. - \"Samaria,\" that is, in the
kingdom of Israel. - \"Forsaking,\" that is, you who are stiff-necked.
\"You are proud,\" you who are in Samaria, you are even confident. They
rely on their power and riches, it is rather said \[, than they rely on
the mountain of Samaria\]. 1) It must be taken absolutely-Optimally,
\"the noblest,\" the noblest among the people. With pride and splendor
you go out for yourselves in the house of Israel, that is, you seek your
own in the kingdom of Israel. To go in and out is to have one\'s way,
Apost. 1, 21. 1, 21. It is a Hebrew way of speaking: You in the house of
Israel have your walk according to your desire; this is better than
pompatice incedere. For themselves they go along, for their gain, for
their lust 2c. They seek their own in the kingdom of Israel.

**V. 2 Go to Calne and see.**

Here you can see what he wants to say with the \"going in Israel\" 2c.
As if he wanted to say: You do it before those kingdoms. This small
kingdom feeds as many satraps as we say: Germany feeds the bishops. The
richest are fed by the goods of the poor 2c. Rome hardly had such rich
people. \"Kalne\" was a city of the Parthians, where the

1\) Compare Col. 174V, note 4.

Roman Empire ceased. Go to Ctesiphon, to the kingdom of the Parthians,
to the east. - \"Hemath\" is the land in which Antioch lies, in Syria, a
very famous kingdom. - \[\"Gen Gath of the\] Philistines,\" toward the
west. Look at the best (optima) in those kingdoms, look\' at the princes
lind noblest and you will see that they are not equal to you. It would
be good if the masculine were put: the best (optimos). - \"And their
border greater\" (Si latior), whether they have as great a space under
their rule as you have. So it is said Is. 5, 8: \"There is no end of the
battle\", all the oerter are taken, that the poor can hardly have a
place to dwell there. Here you see that wealth is not well acquired.

**V. 3. \[Who respect you far from the evil day.\]**

Ye are kept for the day of evil captivity, though ye be rich. - Instead
of et appropinquatis, it should read: et acceditis \[you are bent on\]
sitting or dwelling in injustice, violence, robbery. But by this ye
deal, that ye rule among the people 2c., \"that ye may become high and
great.\" It indicates the striving.

**V. 4. And sleep on ivory couches, and have abundance with your beds.**

He describes their splendor and abundance. Thus you \"adorn\" the
houses, as if you wanted to remain forever. Instead of lascivire, it
should read: \"to make abundance\". He punishes the expenditure in beds.
\[You\] \"make probably four bed-beds\" 2) in one bed. He does not
indicate fornication, but the expense and splendor of the camps. Ye eat
the choice lambs of the flock, which are best to eat. The best of the
flock you devour; \"the best belongs\" to the masters.

2\) In the original: \"bed bed\".

1816 L. xxv, Wo f. Interpretation of Amos (2nd), cap. 6, 5-10. 1817

**V. 5 And play on the psaltery, and make up songs for yourselves, as
David did.**

In psalteriis, that is, on harps. 1) \[They\^ \"have a good courage, eat
and drink\". As the prophet taunts them, so they play on the psaltery to
match David. But they do nothing less than what David did, who did this
to inflame the hearts to the praise of God, but those only for pomp and
splendor, and say: David also played on the psaltery 2c.

V. 6.^2^ ) \[**And drink wine from the bowls, and anoint yourselves with
balm, and care nothing for the harm of Joseph.\[**

\"They drink wine out of golden cups and bowls. The Lord would easily
suffer them to have riches, if only they would also care for the poor
and for justice. They are not concerned about the kingdom of Israel 2c.
They have among themselves the very damaged kingdom and \[go about
damaging it even more\] (et conterendum) 2c. Nowadays, the princes are
seen to be abundant, and there is no end to the oppression of the poor;
and yet, in the meantime, they do not care about them, and there is no
one to judge the oppressors.

**V. 7. Therefore they shall now go in front among those who are led
away captive, and the feasting of the pillories shall cease.**

Therefore, let those be first in punishment who are first in guilt,
Auferetur \[, that is, \"let it cease\"\]. \[Instead of factio in the
Vulgate it should be\] convivium \[; instead of\] lascivientium \[it
should be\]: of those who do abundance (luxuriantium). 3) \"Let the
feasting of the pillories cease,\" which 4) have everything shining and
glorious.

**V. 8 For the LORD hath sworn by his soul, saith the LORD God of
hosts:**

1\) Instead of nablis, Wohl should read nsbüis.

2\) In the Weimar edition, this section is attached to the preceding one
without a new verse number and without any distinction.

3\) Both the Erlangen and the Weimar read: iuxuriontinm.

4\) Instead of Huas, Hui pomposis should probably be read.

**I am displeased with the courts of Jacob, and I am grieved for their
palaces; and I will also deliver up the city, and all that is therein.**

Gen. 19, 24: \"Then the LORD rained fire and brimstone from the LORD.\"
In Zechariah \[Cap. 3, 2.\] the LORD says of the LORD, \"The LORD rebuke
thee.\" Here the HErr swears and says, The HErr 2c. This indicates the
difference of persons in the Godhead. - Instead of domos it would be
better to say \"palaces,\" the splendid ones of which they boast and are
proud, in which, they think, they please me. - \[Instead of) cum
habitatoribus \[in the Vulgate, the Hebrew reads:\] with their
abundance. According to the figure of the synecdoche, he has put \"the
city\" for the cities, 5) \"with all that is within.\" It is a Hebrew
idiom \[Ps. 24, 1. Vulg.\]: The earth is the LORD\'s and its fullness,
that is, all that is on the earth.

**V. 9 \[And though ten men remain in one house, yet they shall die\].**

If a city is destroyed except for ten people, they will also die; I will
even devastate this kingdom.

**V. 10: That every man must be taken away from his family and carry his
bones out of the house.**

He wants to say: So great will be the misery in this captivity that
there will be a lack of crew and the ability to bury the dead). All of
them have been burned 2c. \"A peasant\" image \"of Thekon.\" -
Propinquus.\], \"his cousin\".

**\[And will say, Be satisfied; for they would not that the name of the
LORD should be remembered\].**

\"To remember the name of the Lord\" is a Hebrew expression that is also
found in the Psalms \[Ps. 45, 18\]. Likewise \[Ps. 20, 8.\], \"They rely
on chariots and horses, but we remember the name of the LORD.\" Likewise
in the New Testament

5\) In the manuscript: ?er \[nooZooiion civitalem pro tos. Instead of
tos, we have assumed oivitastoss according to the Hall manuscript. Both
the Erlanger and the Weimarsche offer: pro\^pNotss tosstaturs.

[1818 L. XXV. 3SI-3S3. Interpretations about the prophets.
1819]{.underline}

\[Luc. 22, 19: \"This is for my remembrance\" 2c. This is nothing other
than preaching. Giving thanks and being joyful. This remembrance is the
action of the word and the following of Christ. In Isaiah \[Cap. K4,
5.\] it is said, \"They that remembered thee in thy ways.\" When the
kingdom of mercy is in bloom, \"thou shalt meet them,\" that is, thou
hearest, they praise thee, and are glad. The meaning \[of our passage\]
is: the neighbor who wants to burn the body will say, \"Be quiet, for
here is not 2c. \"Here is not much delicious preaching, boasting\" of
mercy, but here is \"crying and wailing,\" as is also evident from
Isaiah. This is our remembrance: \"weeping and wailing\", because there
is not the remembrance of the name of the Lord; \"so purely shall it be
carried out\". Only mourning and lamentation over the misery will
remain, 1) and the remembrance of the Lord and his mercy has ceased.

**V. 11. 2) For behold, the LORD commanded that the great houses should
be smitten, that they should gain crack (ruinis) 2c.**

That is, he will smite all houses, both great and small; no one will be
safer \[than another\]; \"it shall all come to the ground.\"

1\) In our version, after miserias, it says in parenthesis: \"(rninis
est)\", certainly erroneously. This will be a gloss to the following
verse, because there we read (v. 12. of the Vulgate): pereutiet domuw
mujorem \^\"r\'-rrs.

2\) Here the Weimar does not have a new verse number.

**V. 12: Who can run with horses or plow with oxen on rocks?**

\"Horses do not walk well on the stones, cows do not plow well.\" A
rustic image. I think they are pregnant cows; otherwise they are used to
plow with cattle. The meaning is: the Lord \"cannot perish\" with the
people. He wants to say that this people is not fit for God to deal
with, not fit for the service of God. For you are rich and indulgent.
You are not skillful and fit for the service of GOD, for the work of
GOD. - \"You turn justice into gall,\" that is, you afflict and beat the
wretched and the poor.

**V. 13. and be comforted that it is nothing at all 2c.**

\"You have good days.\" You boast of wealth, of prosperity, of honor,
all of which is nothing. \"Your joy shall come to an end.\" - \"Are we
not strong enough with our horns?\" That is, you boast of the tyranny
that you yourselves have usurped, \"have put on horns\" by force, as if
you were right in doing so and it were granted to you.

**V. 14. Therefore, behold, I will raise up a nation over you from the
house of Israel 2c.**

\"Hemath\" is where the kingdom of Israel begins and ends. That is, I
will bring in a people from midnight, who will make all things desolate,
from the beginning of the kingdom to the end 2c. \"But this is \[times\]
a sermon\" 2c.

**The seventh chapter.**

This chapter is light. What he has threatened with clear words until
now, he now does with dark speeches and visions. All this happens
because God is long-suffering and waits for repentance; finally, when he
sees 2c., he lets us go in our lusts 2c. The prophets have often been
deceived; the preaching is of no avail 2c.; at last he has let them go
2c. These are terrible things

judges of God. It is a sign of mercy that he teaches constantly; he
admonishes when he shows mercy. He is exceedingly merciful, and again
\[exceedingly fierce\] when he is angry. When he wills to have mercy, we
reject him; when we will not, 3) he is angry.

3\) Instead of volurnus we have assumed noturnus.

1820 L. XXV, 3S3-SSS. Interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 7, 1-7. 1821

**V. 1 (The Lord showed me a vision, and behold, there stood one making
locusts).**

\"He showed me\", you to the horror, therefore convert. - Fictorem,
\"one who made\". - \"Since the latter rain began to come\".\" 1) The
first (is the early rain), the later (is the late rain) 2c. The early
rain and the latter rain is mentioned above (Joel 2:23.). It is a
description of the time when this vision happened, namely at the most
inopportune time when the seeds were waiting for rain, at the beginning
of the rising late rain, that is, at the time when the late rain is to
begin.

**(After -the king had his sheep sheared (post tonsionem regis).)**

Tonsio regis (the shearing of the king) means the grazing, the shearing
of the seed in the field before it has ears 2c. This shearing the kings
reserved for their flocks, as a tithe. The superfluous herb, which grew
luxuriantly on the fields, the herb of the seeds.

**V. 2.^2^ ) Now when they were about to eat up the herbage in the
land.**

This indicates the most inopportune time. It is only a threat, but not
done. It indicates that an enemy nation would be in the land, which
would devour everything in the land. The locust, that is, the king of
Assyria will devour everything; but at the prayer of Amos it did not
happen. - \"Who will restore Jacob?\" This indicates the prophet\'s
movement of heart. He makes a comparison between Jacob and the locust,
as if to say, Who can preserve Jacob, who is all-zero against the
Assyrian, \"they devour him\" 2c. The locust \"should eat it\", since a
good 3) king reigned, \"since the\" fruits \"stunden best\" 2c.

1\) For: \"in the beginning, when the Grummet went out\", the Vulgate
has: prineipio Kerrninuntium \"erotini irndris. - In the Weimar we are
offered: \'eum jn \"ipsrst vsnire\', serotinus ivaker prius, postsrius
ste.

2\) The following up to v. 4. is added to v. 1. in the Weimar edition
without a new verse number.

3\) Instead of dona in the Weimar edition, we read with the Erlangen
kvno.

V. 4. **(And behold, the Lord called to the fire to punish with it.)**

\[Instead of et ecce vocabat judicium ad ignem Dominus Deus in the
Vulgate it should read according to your Hebrew:\] 4) And, behold,
\[someone\] cried out that one should fight by filers, or in the fire of
the LORD. It was a vision. I have seen such a thing tried, which was to
be punished with fire; I have seen the sentence passed, that the thing
should be avenged with fire. But the fire was so great, and so great its
fury, that it consumed not only the trees, but also \"the deep,\" that
is, the standing waters, the seas, the fishponds. \"It consumed\"
indicates the ferocity of the rage. \[Abyssus multa, that is,\] many
deep waters, as in the Psalm \[Ps. 36:7.\] The sun cannot dry them up. -
Instead of partem \[\"part\"\] it should be Acker, as above. The fields
were divided into parts and pieces. He indicates that he wanted the
whole rich kingdom to be consumed. A flourishing kingdom was seen before
the eyes, so that nothing less could be expected than that it should be
consumed. But the Lord shows that he will consume the whole \"land\".

V. 5. **O Lord, desist!**

Quiesce, that is, desist, O Lord, \"desist\"; so Amos prays. As one part
is against a whole country, so is Jacob against the Assyrians. The
threats are postponed, but not cancelled, as if to say: It will not
happen while the land is sprouting its herb, that is, while the kingdom
is in bloom, but at another time.

V. 7. **(And he had the lead cord** (**trulla cementarii) in his
hand).**

Trulla, they say, is a straightedge to make the stones straight and
straighten them, \"Richtschnur\". It is not a tool for smearing (litum)
\[, namely a trowel, 5) but\] a straightedge. (The HErr stood on the
wall of the straightedge, is a Hebrew

4\) Supplemented by us according to the Hall manuscript.

5\) In the Hall manuscript: \"murkule\", that is mason\'s trowel, not
\"Richtscheit\", as the Weimar one interprets it in the introduction p.
XX.

1822 L.xxv, 3ss f. Interpretations on diS Prophets. 1823

idiom,) 1) that is, on the wall, which was made straight and
straightened, 2) as the masons do; \[he\] \"measured on the wall\".
That\'s how I saw him standing. The stone that was not right, \[that\]
\"he hit on the head\".

**V. 8. 3) \[And the Lord said unto me, What seest thou, Amos? I said, A
lead cord 2c.)**

\[When the Lord asked Amos,\] he said, \"I see a lead cord,\" a
straightedge. - \[Instead of non adjiciam, according to the Hebrew it
means:\] 4) I will pass no more. That is, though I postpone the
calamity, the captivity, yet I will not pass by him further, I will not
pass by any more, \[no longer) overlooking his sins, but severely
punishing him. By this punishment he will bring the king\'s house into
line. He saw the peculiar (particularem) wrath by which, while the
people were spared, the royal house was to be set right. I will put on
the lead cord, that is, my judgment, that is, I will judge as a
craftsman uses the lead cord to put a stone in its order. Thus will I
do, that they may return to order before the greatest persecution comes.
First I will judge, 5) but afterwards 2c.

**V. 9 6) But the high places of Isaac shall be laid waste, and the
churches of Israel shall be destroyed.**

Now he connects \"all\" faces. - Idoli \[\"Isaac\'s\"\], of the mockery.
Those high places he calls a mockery, a laughter, because they are
mockers and scoffers of God. The mocker Ishmael mocked the son, Isaac,
Gal. 4, 29. Always the children of the flesh are mockers, mockers,

1\) Supplemented according to the Altenburg manuscript.

2\) After M8tiÜ68.t)Atur, where the Erlangen edition indicates a gap,
the Weimar one has the addition, incomprehensible to us: \"Mius
rnorti\^\". According to the Hallische manuscript, we have assumed ut
kaeiunt muratorss instead.

3\) Here the new verse number is missing in the Weimar edition, and the
following is drawn without a distinction to v. 7.

4\) Completed by us according to the Hall manuscript.

5\) We have assumed that the Wei

marche

. 6) The Weimar edition still has this connected with v. 8. until:
\"läoli\" 2c.

\"vexiren the right children\" 2c. They mock there on the heights the
right prophets and preachers. - Heights of mockery are the altars, not
only because they had them on the mountains, but because they were
raised hills, \"higher\" than the other earth. - Sanctificatio \[\"the
churches\"\], \"a pen.\" \"When Israel came out of Egypt\" \[Ps. 114, 2
Vulg.\], \"Judea became his bishopric, Israel became his dominion,\"
that is, his kingdom. He divides the people into kingdom and priesthood.
\[\"And the churches of Israel shall be destroyed,\" that is, for
\[the\] \"pews\" where they worship must \"come down.\" He predicts the
disturbance; now also the particular disturbance of Jeroboam over his
house. The descendants of Jeroboam have to stand up, as the history \[2
Kings 15:10\] shows. He exterminates the wicked, although he postpones
it from time to time. Now follows the dispute of the prophet and \[the\]
\"priest\" of that \[king\].

**V. 10. \[Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam, saying,
Amos maketh a tumult against thee in the house of Israel 2c.\]**

Rebellavit, he has made a \"covenant, thrown up\" 2c. Here you can see
the godlessness that the \"Pfaff\" defends. The true worship he
despises, and his worship of mockery he prefers 2c. All the ungodly
become more and more angry. Just so the pope takes from his dignity and
from the greatness and from the length of time his reasons of proof, as
now 2c. They had a certain word 7) and a fixed time from the kingdom,
\"above which the prophets could not come.\" Thus \[said\] those: Though
we live ungodly, yet our kingdom is of GOD 2c.; therefore we do not err,
because GOD is in the righteous kingdom 2c. But since you come and speak
against the kingdom, you are a \"heretic.\" Therefore, \"\[the
prophets\] must hold forth\" 2c. \"Look on it, he wants to make a riot\"
because he says .you are sinning 2c. Under the title of the kingdom they
feed their belly. Christ \"had to hear\" \[Luc. 23, 5.\], \"He hath
stirred up the people.\" That is the title of the prophets, baß sie
ausrührisch

7\) Instead of tsmpus we have assumed verkuru.

1824 L. XXV, 356-358. interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 7, 10-17. 1825

are. \[The adversaries say This is impossible; the church does not err,
sw is the people of GOD. Christ died for them, the Holy Spirit governs
them 2c.

**V. 11.^1^ ) \[For thus saith Amos, Jeroboam shall die by the sword,
and Israel shall be carried away captive out of his land\].**

He \[Amaziah\] perverted the Prophet\'s speech \[against the House of
Jeroboam\] as if he had spoken against the person \[of Jeroboam\];
\"wanted to disgrace him.\" That is the way everyone is wont to do it.
This is what all the prophets had to hear: This will not happen, because
we are the Church of GOD 2c. The one part of \[this\] word is true, and
\[the church\] is preserved. Thus Paul says \[Rom. 11, 1.\]: I have been
preserved. On the whole people \"they draw it\" 2c. Only the remaining
are preserved, as it says in Isaiah: \[Cap. 10, 22.\] 2). But it is not
on the whole, but on the remaining, that he wants to preserve few, and
destroy many. The wicked cannot believe this 2c.

**B. 12. 13. \[And Amaziah said to Amos, \"You seer, go away and flee to
the land of Judah, and eat bread there, and prophesy there, and prophesy
no more at Bethel, for it is the king\'s pen and the kingdom\'s
house.)**

The king \"must be pious\", he does not answer anything, \"does not
accept it\". Therefore Amaziah turns to Amos: It is the \"king\'s pen\"
and the kingdom or the king\'s house, \"his castle\", because the
kingdom of Israel is the kingdom of God, and the priesthood of Israel is
the priesthood of God. - The two kingdoms \[Israel and Judah\] were
opposed to each other.

1\) The Weimar edition does not have a new verse number here, but only
at v. 16. The following interpretation immediately follows the previous
one there.

S\) Here, both the Erlanger and the Weimarsche have in the margin: 4es.
10, 11.

one another, therefore he says: Say that Judah is to be laid waste, not
Israel; we are the people of GOD.

**V. 14. \[Amos answered and said to Amaziah, I am not a prophet, nor a
prophet\'s son 2c.\]**

He says: I do not belong to the number or state of the prophets, as
Jeremiah \[Cap. 18, 18. 3) distinguishes such ranks) 2c. As there was a
class of priests, so also of prophets 2c. That is, I do not belong to
the state of the prophets. I am specially called, not by the general
profession of the prophets. - \[\"But I am\] a cowherd\" (armentarius),
who has herds of cattle, who picks or seeks \"wild mulberries\". That
is, I am satisfied with little, I do not seek advantage and profit by my
divination; I am satisfied that I nourish myself with my hand, \"seek
that I fill the mouth\" 2c.

**V. 16 \[Do not drip against the house of Isaac\].**

Idoli \[\"Jsaak\"\], of laughing at, mocking. - \"Drip\" is frequent in
the prophets, \"drip.\" It is a word that means to preach. I drip the
punishment and the threat, afterward follows the calamity. It stands for
threaten and preach a future calamity. Thou shalt not threaten us with
calamity.

**V. 17. 4) \[Your wife will become a harlot in the city\].**

In public, before all eyes, the Assyrian will commit fornication, your
wife will be defiled. He indicates the violence 2c. - \"You shall die in
an unclean land,\" namely, you shall die in captivity.

3\) In the Weimarschen is incorrect Hiersw. \[27, 9); likewise in the
Erlanger.

4\) This verse number is missing in the Weimar edition.

[1826 L. XXV, 358 f. Interpretations on the Prophets. 1827]{.underline}

**The eighth chapter.**

The following sermons are the last prophesies, in which he declares that
they shall be disturbed, both concerning the kingdom and the priesthood,
and indicates that he is as it were tired of prophesying 2c. This face
(The *visio*) \"goes\" to the end 2c.

**V. 1. 2.^1^ ) \[A basket of fruit.\]**

Puns cannot be rendered in another language. Here is one \[such\] pun.
2) A cage or container for fattening, 3) in which chickens and other
poultry are fattened; baskets of rice woven, a basket of figs or fruit.
This is the summa: It is present that the people must go to herald and
\"be slaughtered\"; like fattened poultry \"I will slaughter them\". I
have them in the cage, \"in a farmer\", they will not escape. It
indicates that they are to be killed and brought to ruin. A cage for
fattening cattle, where poultry and other animals are kept for slaughter
2c. \"I will prepare a meal.\" \[This pun is as if we said in the
Dellish:\^ \"I see a rice, yea, I will well rip thee; I see kaitz,
\"yea, I will set up a kez\". As if to say: all that I do is in vain.
\"I will divorce him, \[it shall have a\] good year.\" We are divorced,
like \"summer and winter.\" That is, I will spare no more, \[no more\^
overlook their sins; I see that sparing is preached in vain. \"Farewell,
dear fellows,\" I will preach no more 2c.

**V. 3. \[And the songs in the church shall be turned into a howling
(stridebunt cardines templi)\].**

Instead of templi it should be \"of the palace\". - That is, when this
end comes, and the

1\) In the Weimar edition, the following up to v. 3. is attached to the
preceding without verse number or other distinction.

2\) Namely lObst) and pj? sEnde). - In the following in the second place
instead of kaitn is to be read: ksr.

3\) Instead of Karin\'s, it will read.

people is given into captivity, all the palaces shall be destroyed, that
is, the kingdom \"shall go to ruin,\" the royal house shall perish and
be utterly destroyed. - \[Instead of multi morientur in omni loco, etc.,
the Hebrew should read.\] The multitude of corpses will cause silence in
all places. This indicates two things: first, he will destroy the
palaces and the royal apartments; second, the whole kingdom will be
destroyed; the people will be silent, there will be corpses everywhere.
\"Silence\" is \"that which is out.\" In Virgil it is said: camposque
silentes. 4) In Hosea above \[Cap. 4, 16. (?)\]. In Psalm \[49, 13.
Vulg.\]: \[\"When a man stands in dignity, and has no understanding,\]
he is like the unreasoning cattle, and like the same,\" that is, there
will be silence. He indicates the total disturbance of the kingdom,
\"there will be silence,\" as if a pestilence were there and raging. Now
he returns to admonishing and warning them.

**V. 4 \[Hear this, you who oppress the \"poor\" (conteritis)\].**

\[Instead of conteritis it should read:\] you devour and you finish him
off. You ruin the poor, you suck them dry, \"so that no one can stay.
\[You devour, you devour,\" so that no one can remain. But how can this
devouring be done?

**V. 5. When will the new moon put an end to our selling grain
(merces)?**

Merces is the cereal on which you live.

**V. 6 \[That we may bring the poor for money, and the needy for a pair
of shoes among us\].**

In argento, that is, through money. - This is the way \"you deal\" with
the poor: 1. \[You\] \"translate the poverty\", 2. you increase

4\) This citation will not be correct, rather what the Hallische
Handschrift and the Altenburger offer: urnbrssyu\" siltzntulll, Ud. VI,
v. 432.

1828 D- **XXV. 359\^61.** interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 8, 6-10.
1829

the \"grain\", 3. \[you have\] \"wrong measurements\". - \"By a pair of
shoes,\" is a (Hebrew) figure of speech: \[the poor\] is ostracized
exceedingly. The fourth vice is that they do not give whole and pure
grain, but mixed with refuse and garbage, if only the measure is full,
\"GOD grant\" what it is 2c., as nowadays the goods are wont to be
adulterated. \"Evil measure, 1) adulterated measure\"; so the rich deal
with the poor 2c. But what is this, that he says \[Vulg.\], \"When will
the month have an end?\" (\"Month\" is the time when the moon) renews
itself, 2) the new moon, as if to say, \"On holidays you must not sell.
He punishes their excessive avarice, that they hated the feast days, the
new moon and the Sabbaths. That is what is happening today; they did not
like the feasts because of their stinginess. We want to offer grain,
wheat for sale, we want to sell publicly. We want to increase the sekel,
\"must be worth more\" than before, (we want to) counterfeit the scales,
the garbage, refuse, filth (to mix into the grain) 2c. And because you
have deserved such things, I have announced the end to you.

**V. 7. (The Lord swore against the hope of Jacob, \"What matter if I
forget these works of theirs forever?)**

In superbia, that is, \"against the court of Jacob\". - \"Whether I will
forget\", that is, I will never forget. - In finem, that is, altogether.
I will not have mercy, but will afflict and punish everything.

**V. 8. Should not the land shake because of this? 2c.**

\"Should I suffer this,\" that I teach, preach in vain? 2c. \"It must
be.\" He describes the future captivity. \"Yea, it shall be wholly as
with a water overflowing, and shall be led away,\" that is, the
destruction of my people shall rise upon them like a \"downpour, \[a\]
great mighty river, \[a\]

1\) It seems to us that either here or immediately following should be
read instead of \"maß\": Waare.

2\) Weim. Ausg.: \"For rsvoeat one could also read renovut\"; we have
assumed the latter. In the Hall manuscript: Hlsnsik i. s. noviluniuua.

Cloud breast\". Defluet, it will be devoured. The river of Egypt flows
with impetuosity into the sea. Every river that pours into the sea will
be swallowed up by the sea. This great sea, that is, the Assyrian, will
swallow up this people, as the sea swallows up the river of Egypt that
flows into the sea.

V. 9.^3^ ) In that day, saith **the Lord GOD, I will cause the sun to go
down at noon, and the land to be darkened in broad daylight.**

\[This\] luminis, that is, the bright day (lucis). It is a Hebrew way of
speaking: Darkness means misfortune, light happiness. \"The light of my
eyes is not with me,\" says the Psalm (Ps. 38, 11.); that is, the
cheerfulness, the serenity of the countenance has ceased. He wants to
cover the dawn with a very ugly cloud. That is, when the day is
brightest. Diem lucis he calls the middle of the day. It is a
repetition. That is, when everything is in its highest bloom, suddenly
the downfall will come upon them, when there is peace and safety. They
are lifted high, so that they do a the heavier fall. In the highest
happiness and prosperity, when they least believe it, they will be
carried away 2c.

**V. 10. I will turn your holidays into mourning 2c.**

All this is said of the captivity. \"I will put an end to the game.\" -
\"I will bring sackcloth upon all loins.\" At the time of mourning they
clothed themselves with sackcloth. This is an indication of the
sorrowful going in and the sorrowful heart 2c. It is a Hebrew way of
speaking; that is, I will make you go in mourning garments as captive,
wretched people. It is for the happy to adorn the hair, for the sad to
go unkempt. - \[\"To make all heads bald.\"\] This indicates a sign of
sadness. It was the custom for the sad to go along \"shorn.\" In Isaiah
it is said \[Cap. 47:1\], \"Set thee in the dust,\" make thee bald 2c.

3\) The verse number is missing in Weimar\'s.

1830 **\"XXV. 361-363.** interpretations on the prophets. 1831

\[I\] \"will make them so\" that there shall be no joy. That is, it
indicates the most violent, that is, the most bitter pain, the
irrevocable captivity. Note the similitude \[of a mother\'s grief over
an unmarried son\]. 1) I will make that there shall be no hope for the
return from captivity. Novissima \[that is\] the remaining 2) \"shall
have sorrowful heart and misery\".

**B. 11. Behold, the time is coming that I will send a famine into the
land.**

I will do another, that is, the word of God will not be there. The other
is to take away the grace, the teachers and the word. This is the
greatest plague of God. The previous calamity, that the kingdom is
destroyed and the priesthood is taken away, is a lesser calamity than
that the word is taken away. He summarizes both misfortunes in one
prophecy. Up to now God has done nothing; one day he will do it, so that
all misfortune will come and he will take away the word 2c. So it will
happen to us. Since we have it, we neglect it. The Jews find been so
punished, the Christians will be so punished, if \[the teachers) preach
long and accomplish nothing 2c. - \"Hunger\" is a theuration. That is,
the preaching of the word of the LORD will be taken away, that is, no
one will say, preach, teach the word of the LORD. If \[man\] does not
have the word of GOD, \[he\] \"must\" have the word of the devil and
men, for nature cannot rest 2c.

**V. 12.^3^ ) \[That they circulate hm and hither, from one sea to
another\].**

\"From one sea,\" that is, from one place to another, \"and seek.\" Hast
thou not seen the word? 2c. So they did in times past, \[went to\] St.
Jacob, Jerusalem, and \"Rome\" 2c. \[where the devil had his seat and
spoke to us, and gave us

1\) Supplemented by us according to the Altenburg manuscript.

2\) Not rsliquiss, which the Weimar edition emphasized, is the keyword,
but Nvvissiwa, as the Altenburg and Hall manuscripts also testify.

3\) The Weimar one added this section (without a new Berszahl) to V. II.

Poison and dung sent for saffron, as Jeremiah \[Klagl. 4, 5.\] says:
\[The\] \"good bites they scrape) before eaten\", now they eat dung 2c.
What else have we eaten but the Pabst\'s dung? \"have bought it dear\".
\"O how will it rain after that\", after this neglect of the word and
ingratitude 2c. No one gives the right preachers a \"morsel of bread\"
2c. This is the greatest wrath of God 2c.

**V. 13. At that time beautiful virgins and young men will pine away
because of thirst.**

That is, there will be many beautiful young people, but they will \"pine
away, that \[it\] will be shame and pity\" that such beautiful 2c. He
means the souls, \"fine, skillful people\" 2c. \"They are let go\" and
neglected. The universities have been nothing else than silences for the
best sung people 2c., first by fornication and eating and drinking, then
by the most pernicious doctrines 2c. Look at the monasteries of the
monks and nuns. When these young people (pueri) perish, \"that\'s
it.\" - \"Bor thirst.\" He is talking about the spiritual thirst. Why?

**V. 14. Now swear to you Lei the curse (delicto) Samaria.**

If the people do not have the word of GOD, they are led to doctrines of
devils 2c., \"must perish\". - \"The curse of Samaria\" refers to the
idol. They worshipped the true GOt among these idols, but because GOt
did not want this worship, He calls it a curse (delictum = an offense).
For they had this delusion: GOD, who brought us \[out of Egypt\] 2c. has
pleasure in this worship. Thus they misuse the service in terms of the
place, the person, the prescribed manner, the time, 2c. So it is with
the monastic vows: GOD who created 2c. who regards my chastity, my
poverty 2c. - \"Vowing\" is a work of divine service. - \"By the
curse,\" by that ungodly service in Samaria.-\"The manner\" (via), that
is, the way of living which is by the service in Berezba. \"That they
may not rise again,\" \"shall come to gallows,\" and never return.

1832 D- XXV, 364 f. Interpretation -es Amos (2.), Cap. s, 1-6. 1833

**The ninth chapter.**

These last two chapters deal with the final destruction of the kingdom
and the priesthood of this time.

**V. 1. \[Strike at the pommel, that the posts lift; for their avarice
shall come upon their head 2c.\]**

\"Strike\", smash, smash all who find at the top and at the bottom, the
first and the last. \"The knob\" or the extreme end. \"And he smote them
in the head all\" (, so it should read according to the Hebrew instead
of: avaritia in capite omnium). The word \"avarice\" (in the Vulgate)
comes from \"unjust good\" (commoditas) 2c. Behold, so it must read, And
he hath broken it in the head of all. It is a short text, but a right
opinion: all must fall 2c. \"The head\", that is, I will break the
priesthood and the kingdom. All that will be left in the people will be
nothing but a shaking of the posts. He indicates that the people have no
fixed abode on earth and wander about. In Habakkuk (Cap. 4, 13.) it
says: \"You break the head in the house of the wicked\" 2c. This is
prophesied of this people. \"Strike at (the) neck,\" at the head.
Nowadays this people of the Jews is nothing but a trunk without a head.
That is, this whole kingdom and priesthood will be disturbed. This
moving and wandering throughout the whole world is the quaking of the
posts. \"That the posts should quake,\" that is, that they should wander
about through the whole circle of the earth. He interprets what the
quaking of the posts is, and says: \"And he shatters them\" 2c. By
further execution he lays it out even abundantly, \"Their offspring
(residuum) I will slay with the sword.\" The quake comprehends many
things in itself. It will not take place that they could escape.

**V. 2. (And though they be buried in hell, yet shall my hand** fetch
**them from thence** 2c.)

Educet, that is, \"shall bring them out\". - This is said of an assumed
trap (potentialiter): I will deprive them of all refuge in such a way
that if someone (vergrübe) into hell 2c., I would lead them out, pull
them out 2c.

**V. 3. (And if they hid themselves right away 2c.)**

^1^) Absconderint \[s stands for: \"to get stuck\".

V. 4. **(And when they went captive before their enemies 2c.)**

^2^) \"And if they go\" \[2c.\], \[the sword\] shall slay them, slay
them. - \"I will keep mine eyes upon them,\" that is, I will take heed
of them, to do them harm, not to do them good. \[They shall not come out
of my sight.

**V. 5. (For the LORD of hosts is such a one 2c.)**

\"The Lord\" is (in Hebrew) adonai. - Defluet (\"it will be flooded\"),
it will be devoured, we also had above (Cap. 8, 8.). That they cannot
escape is due to the fact that they do not have a man as their enemy,
but God. It indicates the presence of the divine majesty, before whose
face the mountains melt. - \"It shall come upon them utterly, like
waters,\" that is, destruction shall come upon them like a flood, \"like
a downpour\" with impetuosity and violence, that is, \"they shall perish
utterly.\"

**V. 6. He founds his tabernacle (fasciculum suum**) **on the earth.**

He sets forth the majesty. He describes the one of whom he said that he
strikes at the knaus 2c. It is the one who can see everything that is on
earth, sitting on his chair. - Fasciculus is an assembly. He founded his
church by the word,

1\) This is what the Weimar edition has drawn to V. 2.

2\) Here, the Weimar edition has the verse number \"3.\"

**1834** L. XXV, 365-367. interpretations on the prophets. **1835**

that it shall reign in the midst of its enemies. The devil \"wants to
overthrow it\", but cannot, because the Lord has founded it on the
earth. - He cries to the waters of the sea, signifying the rain.

**V. 7. \[Are you children of Israel not like the Moors to me?\]**

Numquid non is as much as nun. - \"Of Cyrene\" \[in the Vulgate, should
be \"of Kir\"\]. 1) Tyr or Kir is a region in Assyria unknown to us,
which we have had above \[Cap. 1, 5. and 4, 2.\]. The prophet
anticipates an objection. The opinion is: With GOD there is no respect
of the person. This people boasts very much that they are the seed of
Abraham. They despise all other nations in comparison to themselves. You
are the property of God if you abide by God\'s word. You do not,
therefore you are the people\] against whom the prophets have spoken. I
transfer fire kingdom to\] the Gentiles. I am a guardian in such a way
that I will not spare you for your sake. Those who have sinned will be
punished. See the passage in the Acts of the Apostles \[Cap. 10, 34.
f.\]. \"I tear away,\" may it be Israel, \[or\] \"call as thou wilt.\"
Ye children of Israel are no more mine than the Moors are. As if to say,
\"Only remember that I will spare you; is equal to me as much Moor and
Jud.\" Note here that GOD cared for the Gentiles even then. See in the
fifth book of Moses \[Cap. 32, 7. ff.\] what he has done to you, and
that for the sake of your fathers 2c. Hear my judgment.

**V. 8. Behold, the eyes of the LORD look upon a sinful kingdom 2c.**

This is Summa Summarum: Wherever there is a sinful kingdom, there are my
eyes over them to punish. \"This I have proved in\" the kingdom of
Caphthor (Cappadociae), Assyria 2c. \"He casteth them out\" 3) 2c. I
have set my eyes on all the kingdoms 2c.- \"Although I have not punished
the Hans Jacob.

1\) Supplemented according to the Altenburg manuscript.

2\) Supplemented according to the Hall manuscript.

3\) In the original: \"auff\", but we think that \"aus\" should be read.

will destroy them, says the Lord. This is the way of the prophets: after
the threat they simply add promises and consolations. The kingdom will
perish, but still the remnant will be preserved. I will receive a
shoulder from the mouth of the wolf and a grape from the whole vine, as
it says above \[Cap. 3, 12\]. The prophet looks at Christinn.

**V. 9. But behold, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel
among all the nations.**

I will not crush all Israel, but I will preserve a remnant. The head,
the kingdom and the priesthood, I will strike down to the neck, but from
the body I will preserve remnants, which I will bring to another
kingdom. I will so command that you shall see that it is not the
government of men. - Concutiam is actually \"to shake, to shake\".
\"They shake their heads at me,\" Ps. 22:8. The people \"shall\" go
\"about thus\" in all the world, go astray on earth, says Hosea \[Cap.
9:17.s, \"as in a sieve\" 2c. What lapillus is, I do not know; I think
it is the dust of the grain. I will sift them, the house of Israel, in
such a way that not a stone shall fall to the earth. I will make it so
that they cannot escape this movement. \"It shall be shaken,\" and none
shall fall out of the sieve. None will be able to escape this sifting
and shaking and rattling; \"all must go into the sieve\" 2c.

V. 10. **All the sinners among my people shall die by the sword, who
say, Calamity shall not be so near, nor meet us.**

As if he wanted to say: \[They say,\] \"the prophets lie,\" we are the
property, the people of God 2c. Thus the prophet anticipates the
objection and turns their presumption back on their head.

**V. 11. In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David, which is
fallen down 2c.**

This is cited by Jacobus in the Acts of the Apostles \[Cap. 15, 16J.
After the

4\) Instead of mutars in the Erlangen and Weimar editions, nutars is to
be read, which is found in the Altenburg manuscript.

1836 L. XXV, 367 f. Interpretation of Amos (2.), Cap. 9, 11-15. 1837

Kingdom and the priesthood is so disturbed, \"I will bring this about\":
I will gather 1) \[all over whom my name is named\] 2c. This is actually
said of the kingdom of Christ. \[\"Afterward\" (Acts 15:16.),\] that is,
since the ruin of the head and of this kingdom is at hand. - \"The
tabernacle of David,\" that is, the people themselves, the \"tribe of
David,\" the kingdom in which the future Messiah was to reign. This
kingdom was shattered at the time of Christ. Among the much despised
remnants were Joseph and Mary, the kingdom of David was at that time a
dead stump; but at that time this dead root shall be revived and the
stump shall flourish. I will gloriously establish a new kingdom.
\[Aperturas, that is,\] the breaks, 2) \"where it is torn, I will mend
it,\" that the kingdom may be new \"and merry, lovely.\" A beautiful
simile: \"from a tent behind the door\", 3) from broken walls 2c. But it
points to Mary, from whom the flower came forth 2c. - \"Before time\"
\"As \[she\] ever was, so beautiful will I make it again.\"

**V. 12: That they might possess the remnant of Edom.**

\[I will make it so, my tabernacles, that not only shall they possess
\[the tabernacle\], but also the rest of the Gentiles shall dwell
therein. There is an emphasis in Acts \[Cap. 15, 17.\] on the word \"ask
for the Lord\" (requirant), here on the word \"possess\" 2c.

1\) In the Weimar edition, eonArsAado is, as we think, incorrectly
highlighted as a keyword, because it is not in the Bible text here.

2\) Here the Weimar edition has again emphasized the explanatory word
rnxtnras as a keyword.

3\) In our original: \"von eyu zceld hinder der thur\", which is
probably a transliteration for \"hut\".

**V. 13. Behold, the time is coming, says the LORD, that one will both
till and reap, and both press and sow. 4)**

The seeds: \"it will be a miraculous thing, work\", that is, the speed
will be so great that one cannot comprehend it, \"that\" the harvest
\"shall soon go upon him\" who is \"tilling\", that is, one will be
tilling at the same time and reaping at the same time, that is, the word
of God will bring forth quick fruit 2c. The swiftness of the word will
cause this, that they will be converted at the same time and bear fruit
at the same time 2c. With the Jews \"they have plowed long and
martyred\", here the work and the fruit will be at the same time. -
\[\"And all the hills will be fruitful.\"\] Culti \[\"fruitful\"\], that
is, they will be lovely, that is, the church where the Word reigns 2c.

**V. 14.^5^ ) \[For I will turn the prison of my people Israel\].**

He is talking about the spiritual captivity. Above he said the people of
Israel will never return 2c. - \[\"That they should clench the desolate
cities\" 2c.\] He speaks of the church, that is, it will be multiplied.

**V. 15. \[For I will plant them in their land 2c.\]**

Instead of dedi it should read dedero. - I will give them a land from
which they shall not be cut off; before I gave them such a land from
which they are cut off 2c.

*Τέλος.*

4\) Vulgate: Leee this vsniunt, dieit vonnnus, et eornxrkökydvt arator
in688or6ln, 6t ealeator uvae initt6nt6in 86U16N, while our original
offers only: \"Leee this verneut arator, his, sernina, es\" 2c. We have
considered arator, seinen as mnemonic words belonging to the biblical
text, but have drawn sernina to the following.

5\) Verse number and keyword are missing in the Weimar.

Continuation and conclusion of the interpretation of the minor prophets
will follow in the fourteenth volume.
